General RRA Information
Definitions
Taxpayer - any individual, legal entity (e.g. company, organisation or institution) or association of individuals (e.g. cooperative) that is subjected to tax according to the Rwandan tax laws. Each taxpayer must have a TIN.
TIN - 'TIN' refers to the Taxpayer Identification Number. This is a unique reference number to be used in all interactions with RRA. No taxpayer should ever have more than one TIN for the same business.
Registration - There are two types of 'registration' concerning RRA. Firstly, taxpayers must register their business, or register as an individual, and receive their unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). Secondly, taxpayers must also register for each relevant tax type, as soon as they fulfil the requirements for that tax type.
Declaration - Taxpayers must submit a tax 'declaration' each tax period for each tax type for which they are registered. Declaring is also referred to as 'tax filing'. The tax declaration contains all the information, including annexures and declaration forms, required by RRA to determine the amount of tax due for that tax period.
Payment - After submitting a tax declaration, the taxpayer must then pay any tax due to the correct RRA account. The RRA reference number received after

declaring ensures each payment is to the correct account.
Tax period - The 'tax period' refers to the period of time that the declaration refers to, which varies by tax type. The declaration concerns the taxable activities during the tax period. Note that the tax period is often not the same as the deadline or the date at the time of declaration.
Deadline - The deadline refers to the date that tax declarations and payments must be submitted by in order to avoid penalties and fines. Taxes can be declared and paid at any time between the end of the tax period and the deadline. This is referred to as the 'filing period'.
Transaction - A 'transaction' refers to any payment or exchange of goods or services being bought or sold.
Annexures - During the declaration process, many tax types require additional information to be submitted in 'annexures'. Typically, annexures are spreadsheets, with separate 'tabs' for different aspects, and are completed for every relevant transaction during the tax period.
Declaration Form - During the declaration process, each tax type also requires the key information to be submitted in a 'declaration form'. This requires the total of all relevant transactions during the tax period.
Turnover - 'Turnover' refers to the total value of sales made by a taxpayer in a tax period. This may also be referred to as revenue, business income or total sales.

Note that turnover is not the same as profit, as profit takes into account the taxpayer's business costs.
Compliance - 'Compliance' refers to the extent to which taxpayers fulfil all their tax obligations, including registering, declaring accurately and paying taxes on time. Businesses or individuals that are 'non-compliant' may face penalties, fines and other enforcement measures.
Arrears - 'Arrears' refers to any amount owed by taxpayers to RRA. This includes any unpaid taxes after the deadline, and unpaid penalties, fines and interest.
Refunds - 'Refunds' refers to any amount owed by RRA to taxpayers. These are also referred to as 'tax credits'. 'Refunds' can be received by taxpayers in the form of 'credit notes' that can be deducted against future taxes, or cash.
Consignment - A 'consignment' refers to any group of goods that is declared together when importing or exporting. Typically, this refers to the 'container load' or 'truck load' that is being transported together.
FRW - 'FRW' refers to Rwandan Francs. This is the currency of Rwanda and the currency that all declarations and payments must be made in unless otherwise specified.

Acronyms

AEO
Authorised Economic Operator
AUL
African Union Levy
BDF
Business Development Fund
BNR
National Bank of Rwanda
BRD
Development Bank of Rwanda
CET
Common External Tariff
CG
Commissioner General
CIF
Cost, Insurance and Freight
CIT
Corporate Income Tax
CMA
Customs Management Act
COMESA
Common Market of Eastern and Southern Africa
CSD
Customs Services Department
DC
Deputy Commissioner
DCG
Deputy Commissioner General
DRC
Democratic Republic of Congo
DTD
Domestic Taxes Department
EAC
East African Community
EIS
Electronic Invoicing System
EBM
Electronic Billing Machine
FOB
Free On Board
FRW
Rwandan Francs
HF
Handling Fee
IDL
Infrastructure Development Levy
IGO
Inter-Governmental Organisation
KVCS
Kigali Veterans Cooperative Society
LGT
Local Government Taxes
LTO
Large Taxpayers Office

MINAFFET
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
East African Community
MINECOFIN
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MINICOM
Ministry of Trade and Industry
MININFRA
Ministry of Infrastructure
MINIRENA
Ministry of Natural Resources
MVF
Motor Vehicle Registration Fee
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisation
NISR
National Institute of Statistics Rwanda
ORG
Office of the Registrar General
OSBP
One-Stop Border Post
PAYE
Pay As You Earn
PCA
Post-Clearance Audit
PIT
Personal Income Tax
PSF
Private Sector Federation
QIF
Quality Inspection Fee
RCA
Rwanda Cooperatives Authority
RDB
Rwanda Development Board
RECTS
Rwanda Electronic Cargo Tracking System
ReSW
Rwanda electronic Single Window
RGB
Rwanda Governance Board
RMF
Road Maintenance Fund
RIED
Revenue Investigation and Enforcement Dept
RRA
Rwanda Revenue Authority
SMTO
Small and Medium Taxpayers Office
SRL
Strategic Reserves Levy
TCC
Tax Clearance Certificates
TIN
Taxpayer Identification Number
USD
United States Dollars
VAT
Value Added Tax

WHT
Withholding Tax
Laws, Ministerial Orders and Rulings
Where are the laws, ministerial orders and rulings governing tax administration published?
All laws, ministerial orders, Commissioner General (CG) rulings, public rulings and ruling cases governing tax administration are available on the RRA website at:
http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=38.
How can taxpayers ask for rulings if anything is unclear?
If there are any aspects that are unclear, or not covered, by the existing laws, ministerial orders or previous rulings then taxpayers may ask for an official clarification or ruling to be made by RRA.
In order to request a ruling, taxpayers must write a letter addressed to the Commissioner General of RRA. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN.
- Identify the relevant sections of laws, ministerial orders or previous rulings.
- State the reason(s) that a ruling is required.
RRA will consider the request and inform the taxpayer of the official ruling directly. In the event that the ruling is considered to be useful to taxpayers more generally, this will also be published as an official ruling on the RRA website on the link above.

Obligations and Bookkeeping
What are the obligations of taxpayers?
The general obligations of all taxpayers include:
- Keeping RRA informed of any changes in contact details or physical address. Any changes must be reported to RRA within seven (7) days.
- Keeping books of account, see below.
- Submitting tax declarations and paying due taxes
- Cooperating fully with all RRA officers and correspondence.
For additional obligations of taxpayers that are registered for specific tax types, see the relevant chapters of this Tax Handbook.
What are 'Books of Account' and what bookkeeping is required of taxpayers?
Books of account are very helpful for businesses to keep track of their cash-flow and profitability. The minimum information required by RRA is for taxpayers to record each sale transaction, with the date, client, nature of goods and amount recorded.
Taxpayers with an annual turnover with annual turnover above FRW 2,000,000 must keep a record of sales.
Taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 12,000,000 must keep books of account and record of sales.

Additionally, they must keep records of the tax liability, withheld tax and a declaration of withheld tax.
Taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000 must also keep a record of assets and liabilities, records of daily income and expenses, records of purchases and sales of goods related to the business, records of stock inventory at the end of the period and information related to controlled transactions.
Taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000 must register for VAT and follow the additional bookkeeping requirements, see page 188 for details.
Taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000 must also declare Real Regime Income Tax and follow the additional bookkeeping requirements, see page 115 for details.
How long must taxpayers keep relevant tax documents?
Taxpayers are required to keep all documents and invoices relating to all tax declarations and payments for five years.



What is an audit?

Audits

An audit is one of the methods RRA uses to ensure that taxpayers are correctly declaring and paying their taxes. Audits involve RRA checking the relevant documents concerning a taxpayer's tax obligations for any tax period(s) within the past five years.
If there is evidence of non-compliance, the taxpayer will be issued with an assessment notice. This contains details of the offence(s), and the unpaid tax due, as well as additional penalties or fines that must be paid.
It is important to note that being selected for an audit does not necessarily mean that RRA suspects the taxpayer of non-compliance. Instead, it simply means that RRA wishes to check a taxpayer's declarations and payments in more detail, to encourage a high level of compliance across all taxpayers.
The processes for audits is similar for domestic taxes, Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees, and for Post- Clearance Audits (PCAs) regarding customs duties.
What are the different types of audit?
There are three main types of audit:
- Desk audit
- Issue audit
- Comprehensive audit

Desk audits are conducted by RRA staff using information that has already been submitted to RRA.
Issue audits are usually focussed on a single tax type, single aspect or single tax period. Refund audits are a type of issue audit, focused on tax declarations claiming refunds from RRA. Issue audits may be desk-based or involve visits to the taxpayer's business premises.
Comprehensive audits are more in-depth and time- intensive. These are usually conducted by RRA staff whilst visiting the taxpayer's business premises and reviewing all relevant documents.
When are taxpayers informed about audits?
In the case of desk audits, taxpayers may not be informed about the audit unless a specific problem is identified. Taxpayers will always be invited to offer explanations before being issued with assessment notices.
In the case of issue audits, taxpayers will be notified at least three days beforehand. The postponement of such an issue-oriented audit cannot exceed seven (7) working days.
In the case of comprehensive audits, taxpayers will be notified at least seven days beforehand. If the taxpayer is not ready, they may write to RRA requesting an extension, up to a maximum of thirty days.

Taxpayers will be informed of what is required of them, the documents required by RRA, their rights, the anticipated timeframe, and the process of the audit during the notification of the audit or the initial meeting.
Any unpaid taxes or additional penalties or fines must be paid within seven days of receipt of the assessment notice.

Refunds
What are the different types of refunds?
There are situations where it is possible for taxpayers to have overpaid the amount of taxes due, and require refunds. These situations occur most frequently for:
- VAT - where the VAT paid on inputs exceeds the output VAT, particularly in the case of zero-rated products and exports.
- Income Tax - where the Instalment Quarterly Prepayments paid by the taxpayer and the Withholding Taxes withheld and paid on behalf of the taxpayer exceed the Income Tax due.
- Audits - where the result of an audit finds that the taxpayer has over declared and over paid.
- Appeals - where the taxpayer pays the taxes due, and is subsequently successful in their appeal.
- Any accidental overpayment.
There is also a special allowance of VAT Refunds for Privileged Persons, see page 200 for more details.
What is the process for taxpayers to receive refunds?
In the case of VAT refunds, the refund process requires no initial action from the taxpayer. For higher value refunds, the claims are refunded to the taxpayer's bank account. For lower value refunds, the claims may be

deducted against future payments. See page 197 for more details on VAT refunds.
In the case of refunds due to successful appeals, the refund process requires no additional action from the taxpayer.
For all other types of refunds, the taxpayer must write a letter addressed to the Deputy Commissioner of their respective tax office. This means either addressed to the 'Deputy Commissioner of Small and Medium Taxpayers Office (SMTO)', or the 'Deputy Commissioner of Large Taxpayers Office (LTO)'. Note that unless informed otherwise, taxpayers are within SMTO. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN.
- Identify the tax period and tax type(s) concerned.
- State the reason(s) for the refund request.
- State the amount of refund claimed.
- Be signed by the taxpayer or legal representative.
RRA will provide the taxpayer with a Refund Claim Notification reply, informing them whether their refund claim has been accepted, adjusted or rejected and the reason for this decision.

Appeals
When can taxpayers appeal?
Taxpayers may appeal to RRA against decisions within 30 days following the conclusion of audits and/or receiving any assessment notices of taxes or penalties.
Do taxes and fines still have to be paid when appealing?
It is important to note that taxpayers are still required to pay any taxes or penalties within the original deadlines. Failure to do so will result in penalties and interest applying as normal. If the appeals are successful, taxpayers will receive refunds or credit notes.
What is the process, timeframe and level of appeal?
In order to appeal, taxpayers must write a letter addressed to the Commissioner General of RRA within 30 days of receiving notice of the decision they wish to appeal. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN.
- Identify the tax period and tax type(s) concerned.
- State the decision that is being appealed.
- State the reason(s) for the appeal.
- Contain all supporting documents, proofs and legal arguments against the assessment.
- Be signed by the taxpayer or legal representative.
RRA is required to confirm receipt of the appeal, and inform the taxpayer of the next step in the process within

30 days. RRA will then either accept the appeal, invite the taxpayer to come to RRA offices to further explain the reasons for their appeal or request an addition 30 days to consider the appeal.
If the taxpayer is not satisfied with the result of the appeal, they may apply to RRA to reach an 'amicable agreement'. If an agreement cannot be reached, the taxpayer may take the appeal further to the Commercial Court, the High Court and the Supreme Court in turn.
What is the cost of appeal?
There is no cost of appealing to RRA. However, there may be fees incurred when appealing to the Courts.
What documents might be used to support an appeal?
The types of supporting documents may vary depending upon the circumstances of the appeal, but typically include: invoices, proof of payment, books of account, financial statements and similar.
It is important to note any documents used to support appeals following the conclusion of audits must have also been provided at the time of the audit.
Can appeals make assessments worse for the taxpayer?
There is no penalty or fine for making unsuccessful appeals. However, appeals could potentially lead to further assessment of the case and the uncovering of new information leading to additional penalties or fines.

Instalments, Waivers and Seizures
What is the procedure for paying taxes in instalments?
Taxpayers who are unable to pay tax arrears or assessment notices at once may apply to pay in instalments. This is available for domestic taxes and local government taxes only.
In order to apply to pay in instalments, the taxpayer must pay at least 25% of the tax due before applying. The payment plan must show an intention to pay the full amount within a maximum period of 12 months (extension with the consent of the Commissioner General, only). The taxpayer should also offer, and provide evidence of, a guarantee, typically in the form of an asset that could be seized by RRA in the event of non- compliance with the approved payment plan.
Taxpayers must then write a letter addressed to the Commissioner General of RRA. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN
- Identify the tax period and tax type(s) concerned
- State the amount of tax due
- State the reason(s) for not being able to pay the whole amount of tax due at once
- Contain their instalment payment plan
- Contain proof of payment of at least 25% of the tax due
- Contain evidence of a guarantee

- Be signed by the taxpayer or legal representative
If the instalment payment plan is approved, the taxpayer and RRA will sign an official agreement detailing the instalment payment plan. Any failure to comply with the payment plan results in the immediate enforcement of the total amount due, and may result in the seizure of the guarantee.
What is the procedure for waivers of any taxes due?
In special circumstances, taxpayers may also request for taxes or penalties to be waived or dropped. Although these requests must be made to RRA, the decision to grant any waivers waive any taxes, fines or interest due is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN).
In order to request a waiver, taxpayers must write a letter addressed to the Commissioner General of RRA. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN.
- Identify the tax period and tax type(s) concerned.
- State the amount of tax due.
- State the reason(s) for the waiver request.
- Contain any supporting evidence as required.
- Be signed by the taxpayer or legal representative.
RRA will acknowledge receipt of the letter, but the timeline, result and communication of the decision is the responsibility of MINECOFIN.

What is the procedure for the enforcement of arrears?
There are many enforcement actions legally available to RRA for the collection of unpaid tax arrears. The typical process is in three steps. Firstly, the taxpayer receives a warning letter from RRA, requesting they visit RRA offices to discuss the arrears situation and repayment options.
If there is no response within fifteen days, RRA may begin 'garnishment'. This means that RRA may work with third parties, such as banks, to freeze the taxpayers' accounts. Finally, RRA may begin search and seizure of movable and immovable assets. This can be sold at auction. A publication of auction must be made (in a public newspaper) at least 15 days before the auction is conducted.

Certificates - VAT, Quitus Fiscal and Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs)
What are the different certificates available from RRA?
There are five main types of certificates available from RRA. These are:
- Value Added Tax (VAT) certificate
- Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs)
- Quitus Fiscal certificate
- Foreign Tax Credit certificate
- Trading License Tax certificate
The Foreign Tax Credit certificate is available for taxpayers to prove that they have paid taxes in Rwanda. The Foreign Tax Credit certificate must be requested from RRA offices, and is processed on a case-by-case basis.
The Trading License Tax certificate is discussed in more detail in the Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees chapter on page 307.
The remaining three types of certificates are discussed in this chapter below.
What are Value Added Tax (VAT) certificates?
VAT certificates certify that the taxpayer is registered for VAT. All VAT registered taxpayers are required to clearly display the VAT registration certificate in plain view at

their main place of business. See page 188 for the details of registering for VAT and the obligations of VAT- registered taxpayers.
VAT certificates are available free of charge. They can be obtained through three channels:
- The Rwanda Development Board (RDB) system during business registration, see page 70.
- Through the E-Tax homepage, see page 74 for details on logging into E-Tax. After clicking on 'TCC Request', the process is the same as described on page 50 below.
- Through the RRA website, see page 50 below for more details.
What are Quitus Fiscal certificates?
Quitus Fiscal is a privileged status available, upon request, to taxpayers who have a good compliance record with RRA. Quitus Fiscal certificates are proof of this status. There are two types of Quitus Fiscal, for withholding tax on public tenders of 3% (WHT 3%) and for withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%). For more details on the interaction of Quitus Fiscal on WHT 3% and WHT 5%, see pages 251 and 392 respectively.
Taxpayers with Quitus Fiscal certificates are not required to pay WHT 5%, or have WHT 3% withheld and paid on their behalf, depending upon the type of Quitus Fiscal certificate. This does not reduce the overall tax payable

by the taxpayer, as any income from imports or public tenders are required to be declared in the annual Income Tax (PIT or CIT) declarations. However, Quitus Fiscal certificates benefit their cash flow as the taxes do not have to be paid up front.
The cost of applying for Quitus Fiscal certificates is FRW 10,000. The process of applying for Quitus Fiscal certificates is described on page 50 below.
There is a distinction between Quitus Fiscal certificates and Tax Clearance Certificates, as described below.
What are Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs)?
Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs) are available, upon the request, to prove that taxpayers have no unpaid arrears with RRA. This may be needed in order to bid for public tenders, apply for bank loans or a range of other reasons.
The cost of applying for TCCs is FRW 5,000. The process of applying for TCCs is described on page 50 below.
What is the process of applying for and obtaining Certificates through the RRA website?
Taxpayers wishing to apply and obtain VAT, Quitus Fiscal or Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs) should first visit the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw and click on 'Tax Clearance Certificate' on the right of the screen. This loads the following screen, the Certificates portal.

The taxpayer can submit the request for the certificate, check the progress, and download the certificate from this page.
The first step is to click 'Request'. This loads the following screen.


The taxpayer must enter their TIN, then select the 'Certificate Type'. The certificate type option contains

three options for each of the certificate types listed above: 'QUITUS', 'TCC' or 'VAT'.
If the taxpayer selects 'QUITUS', they must also select '3%' or '5%' from the 'Quitus Certificate Type' drop-down menu. This refers to the type of Withholding Tax from which they wish to be exempted, see page 49 for details. If the taxpayer selects 'TCC', they must also select from the 'Reason' drop-down menu. This contains a range of reasons for which TCCs might be requested. If the taxpayer selects 'VAT', no other selection is required.
For any of the certificates, if the taxpayer wishes to add any additional or supporting information, these can be typed in the 'Remarks' text box. After all required information has been entered, click 'Submit' to confirm the certificate application.
In the case of Quitus Fiscal and TCC applications, an Acknowledgement Receipt will be generated with an RRA Reference Number, allowing the taxpayer to pay for their application. This needs to be paid before the application is considered by RRA staff. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes and fees. Taxpayers do not need to return to RRA to prove they have paid. Taxpayers can view the status of their application by clicking 'Checking' on the Certificates portal.
Finally, if the application is successful, the taxpayer can download and print the certificate by clicking 'Download' on the Certificates portal.

Motor Vehicle Registration Transfer
When must motor vehicles registration be transferred?
Registration transfer of motor vehicles is required when the ownership of the vehicle changes.
What is the cost of motor vehicle registration transfer?
The Registration Transfer Fee is FRW 5,000 for motorcycles and FRW 10,000 for all other motor vehicles.
For registration transfer of motor vehicles with number plates that begin 'IT', 'CD' or 'UN' to new owners who do not have that status, see page 403 for details on the customs duties that must also be paid.
What documents are required for motor vehicle registration transfer?
The documents required for registration transfer are:
- Revenue Investigation and Enforcement Department (RIED) safety certificate, see page 54 for details
- Sale Contract (containing the date, location, value and the names, phone numbers and signatures of both the buyer and seller).
- Registration Transfer Fee payment receipt
- Latest Yellow Card for the motor vehicle
- The buyer's TIN, see page 54 for details
- Passport photo of the buyer

- Historical insurance information (only required if vehicle will be used as a business such as a taxi).
What is the motor vehicle registration transfer process?
Step 1: In Kigali, take the motor vehicle to RIED office at Special Economic Zone Plot No. B2, Masoro for a verification check of the car to ensure it passes all necessary document requirements. Outside Kigali, contact the local RRA office for details on the nearest RIED office. This service is provided for free.
Step 2: In Kigali, go to the Motor Vehicles Division at RRA Headquarters in Kimihurura. Outside Kigali, go to the local RRA office. RRA staff first will check that the seller of the motor vehicle has no outstanding tax arrears. The RRA staff will then provide the taxpayer with an assessment notice for the Registration Transfer Fee.
Step 3: The taxpayer pays the Registration Transfer Fee.
Step 4: If the buyer of the motor vehicle does not have a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), they must provide RRA staff with a valid Identity Document (ID) or Passport. The TIN and certificate are provided for free.
Step 5: The buyer must provide RRA staff with all the required documents.
Step 6: If all required documents are valid, RRA staff will provide the buyer of the motor vehicle with the updated Yellow Card containing the buyer's details.

Step 7: The process is finished and the buyer is now the legal owner of the motor vehicle.
Registration
Explanation of Registration
Which institution registers taxpayers?
Taxpayers receive a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) when registering their business with Rwanda Development Board (RDB).
However, there are also circumstances where RRA registers taxpayers and provides them with TINs directly:
- Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees
- Non-business registration, for example for:
o Motor vehicle ownership
o Tax Clearance Certificates (TCCs)
o Non-governmental organisations (NGOs), after approval from Rwanda Governance Board (RGB)
o Cooperatives, after approval from Rwanda Cooperatives Agency (RCA)
o Government institutions and projects
As the processes are separate, this Tax Handbook focuses on business registration with RDB in this section. For more details on registering for Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees, see page 330.

For all non-business registration purposes, visit any RRA offices with a Rwanda National ID or a Passport.
How can businesses register as taxpayers and get a TIN?
Business registration in Rwanda is carried out by the Office of the Registrar General (ORG) within the Rwanda Development Board (RDB). This is carried out online on the RDB portal rather than RRA in order to facilitate the aftercare and investment promotion facilities that RDB offers. The RDB and RRA computer systems are integrated to ensure a smooth registration process that provides a single, unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) and a clear understanding of the taxpayer's obligations.
According to the World Bank Ease of Doing Business Index 2019, Rwanda is the simplest and fastest country in East Africa in which to start a business. This Tax Handbook tries to promote this further, with a basic guide to business registration, for further questions visit the RDB website at https://rdb.rw/ or contact RDB directly at:
Rwanda Development Board (RDB) KN 5 Rd, KG 9 Ave, Kigali, Rwanda
P.O. Box 6239
Tel (Local): 1415
Tel (International): +250 727775170 Email: info@rdb.rw

What are the benefits of business registration?
As well as being a legal requirement, there are many advantages to registering as a business. These include:
- Ensuring the business benefits from the protections provided by business laws, such as limited liability
- Improving access to credit from financial institutions
- Inspiring trust in customers with proof of being a registered business
What is limited liability?
Liability refers to the responsibility for any debts that are owed by the business. One of the advantages of registering a business as a company, as opposed to an individual enterprise, is that all debts incurred by the company are the responsibility of the company, they are not the legal liability of the shareholders or the directors. In this way, the liability of the people who run the company is said to be 'limited'. They are not responsible for all the debts of the company, only to the extent of the stake they have in the company, see page 59 for more details.
When must be a business be registered?
A taxpayer must register with the Register General when the business is established.

What is the RDB Business Registration system?
RDB has developed the business registration system to make it easier for taxpayers to register their business. The RDB system is an online portal through which all businesses are registered.
It is important to note that although all business registrations go through the RDB system, this can still be done with the help of RDB staff at RDB offices. Similarly, Business Development Fund (BDF) staff are also trained to help taxpayers register their businesses at BDF offices.
Nevertheless, there are many advantages for taxpayers to register online. This Tax Handbook aims to provide all the information necessary for taxpayers to be able to register online.
Any questions during the registration process can be answered by calling the RDB call centre toll-free on 1415.
How much does it cost to register a business?
It is free to register a business in Rwanda. It is free to register online and at RDB and BDF offices. However, some private internet cafés also offer assistance with business registration and can charge a fee for this service.
What are the different categories of businesses?
There are three categories of business that can be registered. On the RDB business registration system

these are: 'Domestic' company, individual 'Enterprise' and 'Foreign' company.
Registering as 'Domestic' is for domestic companies or for subsidiaries of foreign companies.
Registering as an 'Enterprise' is for sole traders or partnerships and is the simplest way to start and conduct business in Rwanda. 'Enterprise' typically refers to a business whose turnover is less than FRW 10,000 per day.
Registering as 'Foreign' is for companies which already exist and are registered in a foreign country that are undertaking business in Rwanda. It is important to note that this does not include domestic subsidiaries of foreign companies.
What are the different types of 'Domestic' company?
Within the 'Domestic' company business category, the Rwanda Companies Act recognises four legal types of companies. These are: limited by shares, limited by guarantee, limited by shares and guarantee or unlimited.
Limited by shares is the most common business type, and is suitable for most profit oriented businesses. Limited by guarantee is suitable for non-profit organisations and charities. Limited by shares and guarantee, and unlimited, are rare business types and should not be selected without consultation with RDB.

These four types of companies all follow the same registration procedure, although requirements vary.
Companies limited by shares must register a chairman of the board, a managing director and at least one shareholder. However, these can all be the same person.
What documents are needed to register a business?
The requirements for registering vary depending on the category of business. These must be scanned and attached whilst completing the business registration application. The documents that are required for each business category are listed below:
'Domestic' company:
- Rwanda National ID or Passport (for all shareholders, directors, company secretaries, accountants)
- Notarised articles of association (if applicable)
- Notarised company resolution to open a subsidiary company (if a subsidiary)
- Notarised certificate of incorporation issued by the registration company in the country of incorporation (if a foreign subsidiary)
Individual 'Enterprise':
   - Rwanda National ID or Passport 'Foreign' company:

- Rwanda National ID or Passport (for all shareholders, directors, company secretaries, accountants residing in Rwanda)
- Notarised power of attorney to present the company in Rwanda
- Notarised articles of association
- Notarised certificate of incorporation issued by the registration institution in the country of incorporation
- Notarised company resolution to open a branch in Rwanda
How should the type of 'Business Activity' be chosen?
The RDB business registration system asks taxpayers to identify the type of business activities that they plan to conduct. This is not binding, taxpayers can at any time carry out business activities that they do not include here.
However, it is important that this 'Business Activity' category is completed as accurately as possible when registering. This uses the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC), also used by the National Institute of Statistics (NISR), The National Bank of Rwanda (BNR) and the Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN) to improve statistics and policy making.
The RDB system is designed to make it easier for taxpayers to choose their business activities, by first

choosing the broad sector, and then choosing the more specific activity within that sector.
The RDB system allows taxpayers to choose as many different activities as they intend to carry out, and then requests that they choose one of these to designate as their main business activity. This should be the business activity that they expect will contribute the largest share of their value added, i.e. to the selling price of their products, compared to the price of their inputs.






How do taxpayers register for different tax types?
All businesses are immediately registered for Income Tax during business registration. This is either Personal Income Tax (PIT) or Corporate Income Tax (CIT) depending upon the number of shareholders that have been registered. If there is only one shareholder, the taxpayer is registered for Personal Income Tax (PIT). If there is more than one shareholder, the taxpayer is registered for Corporate Income Tax (CIT).
All businesses must also register for Trading License Tax and Public Cleaning Service Fees at LGT tax centres immediately after business registration. See page 330 for more details on registering for Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees.
The Trading License Tax certificate, available after declaring and paying Trading License Tax, is required for

all profit oriented activities, see page 307 for details. Taxpayers registered for Trading License Tax must also declare and pay Public Cleaning Service Fees on a monthly basis, see page 322 for details.
In addition, when registering, certain questions prompt the registration of tax accounts for other tax types. These include:
VAT: 'General Info' --> 'Request for Value Added Tax' -->
'Would you like to request for VAT Certificate?' --> 'Yes'
--> Enter expected turnover amount.
PAYE: 'Employment Info' --> 'Does the company have employees?' --> 'Yes' --> Enter required details.
To register for any other tax types, or to register for any additional tax types in the future, call the RRA call centre on 3004 or visit any RRA offices.
When must taxpayers start declaring and paying taxes?
Tax declarations for all registered tax types must be submitted for tax periods from the date the taxpayer was registered.
Even if there is no business activity within the first, or subsequent, tax periods, the declarations must still be submitted to avoid penalties. This includes domestic taxes such as Income Tax and also Local Government Taxes such as Trading License Tax and Public Cleaning Service Fees, see page 11 for a summary of tax deadlines.

Example 2
Rukundo is starting a private business of a retail shop. He is starting the business himself using his own capital and with no staff, partners or shareholders. He expects a daily turnover of approximately FRW 20,000, equivalent to an annual turnover of approximately FRW 8,000,000.
He wants to be protected by limited liability. Rukundo selects a 'domestic' business, with the company category 'private', the type 'limited by shares' and his position as 'managing director'. As shown below:










On the share info tab, he lists himself as the only shareholder. On the members of the board tab, he enters himself as the only member of the board. On the business activity tab, he enters the business sector as 'G - Wholesale or Retail Trade; Repair of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles' and then chooses 'G4711 - Retail sale in non-specialised stores with food, beverages or tobacco predominating'.




Step-by-Step Guide to Business Registration
Step 1: Register on the RDB business registration system
Access	the	RDB	business	registration	system	at http://org.rdb.rw/busregonline.
The RDB business registration login page is shown below.


New users must first register an account by clicking on 'Register Here'. This leads to the 'Create New Online User' screen. Enter the required personal details and click submit to register an account.


The RDB system will then send an email to the given email address containing a website link. Click on the link provided to validate and activate this account.

Once the account has been activated, return to the RDB business registration system and enter the chosen login details to begin the business registration process.
Step 2: Choose the business category to be registered
Once logged in, an initial message advises that if the company already has a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), then do not use this system to register.

If the company does not yet have a TIN, click OK to continue to the business registration system screen below.

The business registration system first requires selection of the type of business being registered. See page 58 for more details.

Note that the 'Name Reservation' option does not register a business, but can be used to reserve a business name for registration in the future.
For each of the categories, 'Your Position' within the business must be noted. In addition, 'Domestic' requires a choice of 'Company Category' which can be public or private and 'Type'. For more details on each of these business types, see pages 58.
Step 3: Complete the business registration application
Depending upon the business type selected, the details that must be completed differ slightly. The screen below shows the tabs after selecting a domestic, private, limited by shares company registration.


Note that each of the major tabs ('General Info', 'Share Info' etc.) has separate minor tabs ('Company Name', 'Articles of Association' etc.) Ensure to complete all tabs before submitting the registration.
Once all tabs are completed, click the 'Preview' tab to check that all the details entered are correct, before

clicking 'Submit' to submit the business registration application.
After submitting, RDB will validate that the information entered is correct. If this is approved, an SMS will be sent to inform the taxpayer that the application has been sent to RRA to issue a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). Once the TIN is issued, another SMS will be sent to inform the taxpayer that their business has been registered.
Step 4: Print Certificates
After receiving the second SMS, confirming that RDB has validated the business registration application and RRA has issued a TIN, the taxpayer must log back in to the RDB Business Registration system.
Once logged in, click on the 'Certificates' option on the left hand side. There are two certificates that must be printed and kept securely.


Firstly, choose the 'Certificate Type' that matches the application type, for example 'Domestic' if the business type that was registered was a domestic company. Once selected, download and print this certificate. Secondly, choose the 'Certificate Type' titled 'Memorandum' and also download and print this certificate. If there are any other applicable certificates, for example a 'Value Added Tax' certificate, then these should also be printed at this stage, see page 48 for more details on certificates.
Once registered, the business can operate and declare and pay taxes as normal. The immediate obligations of the taxpayer are explained on page 64.
Step 5: Register, declare and pay all required taxes
The taxpayer is automatically registered for Income Tax. Visit RRA offices to register for any additional required taxes, including visiting LGT tax centres immediately to register for Trading License Tax and Public Cleaning Service Fees.

Domestic Taxes and E-Tax
Explanation of Domestic Taxes and E-Tax
What are domestic taxes?
Domestic taxes include the following tax types which can each be declared in a similar manner using E-Tax:
- Income Tax, including:
o Personal Income Tax (PIT)
o Corporate Income Tax (CIT)
- Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
- Value Added Tax (VAT)
- Excise Duty
- Withholding Taxes (WHT), including:
o Withholding Tax of 15% (WHT 15%)
o Withholding Tax of 3% (WHT 3%)
- Gaming Tax
- Tax on Minerals
- Capital Gains Tax
Domestic taxes progressively tax income (PIT, CIT, PAYE and Capital Gains Tax), ensure compliance (WHT), efficiently tax consumption (VAT), deter consumption with negative social impacts (Excise Duty and Gaming Tax), and ensure that all Rwandans share the benefit from the country's natural resources (Tax on Minerals).
For more details on the rates and bases of each domestic tax, see their respective chapters in this Tax Handbook.

What is E-Tax?
E-Tax is an online portal through which all domestic tax types can be declared. This can be done online or with the help of staff at RRA offices. RRA has developed the E- Tax system to make it easier for taxpayers to declare and pay domestic taxes.
The process of declaring online is the same as the process of declaring with the help of staff at RRA offices. However, there are many advantages for taxpayers to declare online. This Tax Handbook aims to provide all the information necessary for taxpayers to be able declare online.
The only domestic tax type which could cannot be declared online is Capital Gains Tax. This can only be declared with the help of RRA staff at RRA offices. For more details on Capital Gains Tax, see page 278.
What is M-Declaration?
In certain cases, Income Tax can also be declared on mobile phones using M-Declaration, see page 110 for more details on declaring Income Tax using M- Declaration.
However, the majority of domestic taxes can only be declared using E-Tax. Therefore, this chapter focuses on the E-Tax process.

What are the benefits of declaring online using E-Tax or on mobile phones using M-Declaration?
Although the process is the same, there are many advantages to declaring online or on mobile phones rather than with the help of staff at RRA offices. The advantages of declaring online or on mobile phones include being able to:
- Declare taxes anytime, from anywhere.
- Avoid travel costs of visiting RRA offices.
- Avoid queuing times at RRA offices.
How do taxpayers register and login to E-Tax?
Access the E-Tax website at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or through the RRA website http://www.rra.gov.rw and click 'Pay Domestic taxes here' on the right of the screen.
Taxpayers are automatically registered for E-Tax when their business is registered with RDB. Taxpayers are informed of their unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) and E-Tax password by SMS and email using the contact details given when they registered.
Once logged in, the E-Tax password can be changed by the taxpayer by clicking 'Change Password' on the left of the E-Tax home screen.
What if taxpayers do not know their TIN?
If a taxpayer does not know their TIN, they can visit RRA offices or call the RRA call centre toll-free on 3004.

In addition, if an individual taxpayer (i.e. not a company) does not know their TIN, they can visit the RRA website at http://www.rra.gov.rw and click 'Search for TIN using National ID' under the 'Other online services' heading.

This leads to the following screen asking whether the taxpayer registered their TIN using a Rwandan National ID or a Passport. After clicking on the relevant choice, the National ID or Passport Number can be entered, and the associated TIN is displayed by clicking 'Show TIN'.

What are the common problems when using E-Tax?
There are three main types of problems faced by taxpayers when using E-Tax, these concern: annexures not validating, particular tax types or tax periods not being available on the 'Document Details' screen or declarations not submitting. Potential solutions to these problems are discussed in turn below.

What are the causes of an annexure not validating?
When completing annexures, ensure to:
- 'enable content' after opening the spreadsheet.
- use the required date format (dd/mm/yyyy) for the dates entered and the computer's settings.
- avoid blank cells for rows that have been started
- try using a Windows computer instead of a Mac.
- click to 'Validate' and save the annexure.
See page 79 for more details on solving these problems.
What if the particular tax type or tax period is not available for declaration?
If the tax type and tax period for the relevant declaration is not available on the 'Document Details' screen, the taxpayer can request for it by calling the RRA call centre toll-free or visiting RRA offices.
What are the causes of a declaration not submitting?
When submitting declarations: the annexures must be uploaded, equal to the declaration form, and all certified.
If the declaration and annexures are not equal, either the declaration or the annexures must then be changed until they are equal and accurate, see page 89 for details.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring domestic taxes using E-Tax
Step 1: Log-in to E-Tax
Access the E-Tax website at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or through the RRA website http://www.rra.gov.rw and clicking on 'Pay Domestic taxes here' on the right of the screen. This loads the following login screen:

Login using the TIN and E-Tax password.
See page 74 if the TIN is not known. If a taxpayer does not know their password, it can be reset by clicking 'Forgot Password' on the E-Tax system login and receiving a new password by email to the address used when registering.
Step 2: Download, complete, validate and save annexures
After logging in, the E-Tax home page is loaded as shown below.



The first step of declaring domestic taxes is to download, complete and save the annexures of that tax type.
To download annexures, hover the mouse over 'Annexure Downloads' on the top-right hand side of the E-Tax homepage, and click on the applicable tax type to download the annexures.
This will start a download of a spreadsheet file which can be opened in Microsoft Excel or other spreadsheet software.

The annexures differ depending upon the tax type. For details on a specific tax type, view the relevant chapter of this Tax Handbook.
Annexures have an 'Instructions' tab and at least one other tab to be completed. Only the tabs that are relevant to the taxpayer in that tax period need to be completed. Each relevant tab must be completed, validated and saved separately.

There are five important things to note when completing the annexures of all domestic taxes. These concern:
- Enabling Content
- Date Format
- Blank Cells
- Mac computers
- Validating and Saving
Enabling Content
The first thing that must always be done after opening the spreadsheet is to enable the active content. Without enabling content, it is not possible to validate or save the

annexures. The process of enabling content varies depending upon the spreadsheet software.



Date Format
In order to validate the annexure, all dates must be entered in the required format of dd/mm/yyyy. However, it is also important to note that the annexures will not validate if the date settings of the computer are also not in the format of dd/mm/yyyy. This may show the following error message, even if the dates entered in the cells are in the correct format.

The process of changing the date format of the computer varies depending on the computer operating system. Date formats are often linked to the language settings of the operating system; E-Tax is set to English (UK).


Blank Cells
If any data is entered in a row, then that row must be completed before validating. In addition, the majority of columns cannot be left empty. This may show the following error message.


Mac computers
The E-Tax system is not yet fully compatible with Apple Mac computers. If the taxpayer is using a Mac computer and the annexure is failing to validate and save, despite enabling the content, using the correct date format and avoiding blank cells, there may be an issue with compatibility. Try again using a Windows computer.

Validating and Saving
Annexures are saved in a different way to other spreadsheets. For each tab, once all data is entered for the tax period, click the validate button within the excel spreadsheet.

This will check that all data is entered in the required formats. If this is the case, it will automatically save a text file under the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine.
If any of the format rules are violated, it will alert an error message and the file will not be created. The error message explains what needs to be corrected.
Even after the file is created, any changes can still be made. Clicking validate, this will save over and replace the previous file.
Step 3: Select and complete the declaration form
After all the relevant annexures have been downloaded, completed, validated and saved, the declaration form can be completed. This requires logging back into E-Tax and accessing the homepage.



Hover the mouse over 'Tax Declaration' in the left side of the E-Tax homepage, and then click on 'New Declaration' from the list that appears. To revise previously submitted declarations, click on 'Submitted Declarations'. Clicking 'New Declaration' leads to the following screen.

Without changing the type, year or tax type, click 'Submit' to continue to the 'Document Details' page.



The 'Document Details' page lists all un-submitted tax declarations. The status column is set to 'In progress' if any declaration details have been entered, or 'pending' if no details have yet been entered. Once a declaration has been submitted, it is no longer accessible on this screen.
To enter a tax declaration, click on the document number of the relevant tax type and tax period. Ensure the correct tax type and tax period is chosen.
If a taxpayer wishes to declare for a particular tax type, or tax period, and this is not available on the 'Document Details' screen, the taxpayer can request for it to be added by visiting RRA offices or calling the RRA Call Centre toll-free on 3004.
Having clicked on the document number of the relevant tax type and tax period, the screen now focuses on that particular declaration, as seen below. The first step is to click on 'Enter Declaration'.



This opens the declaration form. The white boxes are entry fields where numbers must be entered (or left as zero). After all the necessary fields are entered, click to 'save' and automatically calculate the grey calculation boxes, including the tax due.
Many of the rows in the declaration form are similar to the columns of the annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the declaration form, the total combined values for all rows during that tax period must be entered.




After saving the declaration form and checking that the fields entered were correct, click 'Continue with Upload Annexures'.
Step 4: Upload annexures, compare with the declaration form and submit the declaration
To support the declaration form, the previously validated and saved annexures must also be uploaded as evidence. The annexures that can be uploaded depend upon the tax type that is being declared. Each annexures tab is uploaded separately.

Example 8
Amahoro continues her VAT declaration as saved above. She uploads 'Sales', 'Local Purchase', 'VAT Importation' and 'VAT Retained' annexures as required. She has no 'Deductible VAT Reverse' to declare in this tax period, so this annexure is not uploaded.










For each of the applicable annexures, she clicks 'Upload', then 'Choose File'. All annexures are automatically saved in the C: drive, in the 'RRA' folder. Once selected, she clicks submit, and repeats for all relevant annexures.

After annexures have been uploaded, they can be checked by clicking on 'view', and changed by clicking on 'delete' and then re-uploading. Once all relevant annexures are uploaded and correct, click on 'Compare with Declaration'.
This allows comparison between the declaration and the annexures. If these are equal, then certify that the entries on this declaration are true and correct and confirm understanding that a false declaration may result in prosecution by clicking on 'I accept'. Then submit the declaration by clicking 'Submit'.
If the declaration and annexures are not equal, it is not possible to submit the declaration. Either the declaration or the annexures must then be changed until they are equal and accurate. To change the declaration form, click 'Modify Declaration'. To change the annexures, click 'Delete' on the relevant annexure, make necessary changes in the annexures spreadsheet, validate and save as before, and then re-upload the revised annexures. Then follow the same steps as before to certify and submit the declaration.



There may be a slight delay as the declaration is submitted. If the declaration is submitted successfully, the following screen is loaded.




For more details on acknowledgement receipts and paying taxes due, see page 407.

Domestic Taxes Penalties and Fines
There are penalties and fines for certain offences that are similar for the majority of domestic taxes. The penalties and fines for these offenses are explained in turn below. For penalties and fines that are relevant to specific tax types, see their respective chapters in this Tax Handbook.
If a self-disclosure is made by a taxpayer that was previously not registered with the tax administration, the penalties and interest described in this section are waived.
What are the penalties for late declaration and late payment?
A taxpayer who has failed to submit a tax declaration and payment within the required deadline must still declare and pay, and is subject to:
- A fine for late payment, depending on the period:
o Twenty percent (20%) of the tax due if the time limit for declaration and payment has not been exceeded by thirty (30) days;
o Forty percent (40%) of the tax due if the time limit for declaration and payment has been exceeded by thirty (30) days but has not been exceeded by sixty (60) days;

o Sixty percent (60%) of due taxes if the time limit for declaration and payment has been exceeded by sixty (60) days.
- 1.5% interest on a monthly basis
- Fixed administrative fine of:
o FRW 100,000 for taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 20,000,000
o FRW 300,000 for taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000
o FRW 500,000 for taxpayers who have been informed by RRA that they are in the category of 'large' taxpayers






What are the penalties if tax due is declared on time but paid late?
A taxpayer who declared the requisite tax on time, but did not pay the declared tax is subject to:
- A fine for late payment, depending on the period:
o Ten percent (10%) of the tax due when the time limit for payment has not been exceeded by thirty (30) days;
o Twenty percent (20%) of the tax due when the time limit for payment has been exceeded by thirty (30) days but not exceeded by sixty (60) days;
o Thirty percent (30%) of due taxes if the time limit for payment has been exceeded by sixty (60) days.
- 1.5% interest on a monthly basis
- Fixed administrative fine of:
o FRW 100,000 for taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 20,000,000
o FRW 300,000 for taxpayers with annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000

o FRW 500,000 for taxpayers who have been informed by RRA that they are in the category of 'large' taxpayers
What are the penalties for a taxpayer who declares less than the correct tax due?
The penalties for under-declaration depend on whether the taxpayer rectifies their own tax declaration or whether the taxpayer is found by RRA to have declared less than the correct amount.
A taxpayer who submits a declaration, and is found by RRA to have declared lower tax due that is more than 10% of the correct amount but less than 20% of the correct amount, must pay the difference and is subject to:
- A fine of 10% of the amount of the understatement
- 1.5% interest on a monthly basis
A taxpayer who submits a declaration, and is found by RRA to have declared lower tax due that is more than 20% of correct amount, must pay the difference and is subject to:
- A fine of 20% of the amount of the understatement
- 1.5% interest on a monthly basis

A taxpayer who submits a declaration, but realises that they have declared a lower amount due than the correct amount and conducts self-reassessment after the deadline but before notification of an imminent audit, must pay the difference and:
A fine of:
- Twenty percent (20%) of the tax due, if the time limit for declaration and payment has not been exceeded by thirty (30) days;
- Thirty percent (30%) of the tax due, if the time limit for declaration and payment has been exceeded by thirty (30) days but not exceeded by sixty (60) days;
- Forty percent (40%) of the tax due, if the time limit for declaration and payment has been exceeded by sixty (60) days;
A taxpayer who submits a declaration, but realises that they have declared lower tax due than the correct amount and conducts self-reassessment and pays the correct amount before they are notified of an imminent audit, is not subject to the administrative penalty for under-declaration.



Example 11
Immaculée declares Pay As You Earn (PAYE) due of FRW 125,000 for a tax period. However, during an audit four months later RRA discovers that she should have declared PAYE due of FRW 165,000. The understatement is:

-	1 - (FRW 125,000 / FRW 165,000) = 24.2%.
Immaculée has to pay the FRW 40,000 difference and the
penalty of:
-	FRW 40,000 * 1.5% * 4 months = FRW 2,400
-	FRW 40,000 * 10% * 2 = FRW 8,000
In addition to paying the FRW 40,000 difference, Immaculée must pay FRW 8,000 + FRW 2,400= FRW
10,400.
What are the rules concerning interest, fixed administrative fines and repeat offenders?
Interest is non-compounding. This means that interest is always on the principal amount, i.e. the tax due, there is no interest charged on interest. Interest is charged from the first day after the tax should have been paid until the day of payment, which is included. Every month that begins is considered as a complete month. The interest cannot exceed 100% of the original tax due.
If an offence is repeated on another occasion within five years, the fixed administrative fine is doubled. If the

offence is repeated on any other occasions within five years, the fixed administrative fine is quadrupled. Taxpayers are informed by RRA whether they are categorised as small, medium or large taxpayers.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT)
Explanation of Income Tax
What is Income Tax?
Income Tax is a tax on income resulting from business, self-employment and investment activities. Income Tax ensures that all businesses benefiting from Rwanda's infrastructure, security and prosperity contribute their fair share towards the nation's development.
Income Tax includes both Personal Income Tax (PIT) and Corporate Income Tax (CIT). The process of declaring these two tax types are similar so they are combined in this chapter of the Tax Handbook. A taxpayer only has to declare one of these two tax types.
Income Tax has different 'regimes' available for taxpayers of different levels of income. There is also Motor Vehicle Income Tax available to taxpayers who receive motor vehicle transport income. These options make the process of declaring and paying Income Tax simpler for lower Income taxpayers, including being able to declare on mobile phones using M-Declaration.
The main declaration of Income Tax is submitted on an annual basis. Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) are also declared and paid each quarter based on the annual declaration. This helps taxpayers to smooth out their tax obligations over the year.

What are the differences between PIT and CIT?
PIT is for sole traders, partnerships and unincorporated businesses, whilst CIT is for companies. The rates of PIT and CIT are the same for all types of Income Tax with the exception of 'Real Regime', see page 105 for more details.
This Tax Handbook will refer to 'Income Tax' if the information applies to both PIT and CIT. If the information is specific to only one tax type, the Tax Handbook will refer to 'PIT' or 'CIT' separately.
Who must register for Income Tax?
Any taxpayer who receives taxable income during the tax period must register for Income Tax. Taxpayers are automatically registered for the relevant tax type when registering their business with RDB.
Taxpayers must register their business with RDB within seven days of beginning taxable activities or establishing the company, see page 105 for more details on business registration. Whether they are registered for PIT or CIT depends upon the type of business.
What is taxable income?
Taxable income includes all income sourced in Rwanda resulting from business, employment or investment activities. This includes:

- Income generated from goods sold in Rwanda and services performed in Rwanda, including income generated from employment.
- Income generated by artists, musicians or crafts persons from performances in Rwanda.
- Income generated from activities carried out by a non-resident through a permanent establishment in Rwanda.
- Income generated from movable or immovable assets, livestock and inventory generated from agriculture and forestry or the sale of such assets.
- Dividends distributed by a resident company.
- Sale or transfer of commercial immovable property.
Which taxpayers are exempt from Income Tax?
Taxpayers that are exempt from Income Tax are not required to register, declare or pay Income Tax. Taxpayers that are exempt from Income Tax includes:
However, they are required to submit their financial statements on E-Tax by the 31st of March after the tax period. Taxpayers that are exempt from Income Tax includes:
- Public Institutions including District Offices, National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB) and the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD).

- Organisations that carry out only activities of a religious, humanitarian, charitable, scientific or educational character, unless the revenue received during a tax period exceeds their expenses and the organisation makes a profit.
- Inter-Governmental Organisations (IGOs) and agencies of technical cooperation, if exemption is provided for by international agreements.
What are the exemptions for agricultural income?
Income below FRW 12,000,000 resulting from agricultural and livestock activities is exempt from Income Tax. It is important to note that only the income above the threshold is taxable.

What other incentives are available for Income Tax?
There are additional exemptions or discounts that can be applied if the taxpayer fulfils certain criteria. The types of tax discounts allowed are subject to the Investment Code

and Law on Direct Taxes on Income, see the Rwanda Development Board (RDB) and RRA websites respectively for the latest versions of these laws.
What are the different Income Tax regimes?
Income Tax has three 'regimes' available for taxpayers of different amounts of annual turnover. These make the process of declaring and paying Income Tax simpler for lower income taxpayers. The regimes, and their corresponding turnover categories, are displayed below:

Annual Turnover
Regime
FRW 2,000,000 - FRW 12,000,000
Flat Tax
FRW 12,000,001 - FRW 20,000,000
Lump Sum
Above FRW 20,000,000
Real Regime
In addition to these regimes, there is also a different option available for taxpayers earning motor vehicle transport income. This is referred to as Motor Vehicle Income Tax, see page 107 for more details.
What is the Flat Tax Income Tax?
The Flat Tax regime is available to taxpayers with an annual turnover between FRW 2,000,000 and FRW 12,000,000. The taxpayer must pay a specific 'Flat' amount of annual tax due depending upon their annual turnover, as displayed below.

Annual Turnover
Annual Tax Due
FRW 2,000,000 - FRW 4,000,000
FRW 60,000

FRW 4,000,001 - FRW 7,000,000
FRW 120,000
FRW 7,000,001 - FRW 10,000,000
FRW 210,000
FRW 10,000,001 - FRW 12,000,000
FRW 300,000
Note that taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 2,000,000 are required to submit their Income Tax declaration, but are not required to pay any Income Tax.
Flat Tax regime can be declared using M-Declaration or E-Tax, see page 123 and 128 respectively for details.

What is the Lump Sum Income Tax?
The Lump Sum regime is available to taxpayers with an annual turnover between FRW 12,000,001 and FRW 20,000,000. The taxpayer must pay a specific 'Lump Sum' tax due equal to 3% of their annual turnover.
Lump Sum regime can be declared using M-Declaration or E-Tax, see page 123 and 130 respectively for details.




What is the Real Regime Income Tax?
The Real Regime is required for all taxpayers with an annual turnover above FRW 20,000,000, as well as all liberal professions. Liberal professions include, but are not limited to, accountants, company auditors, tax consultants, architects, real estate agents, lawyers, bailiffs, doctors, dentists and other similar professions. In addition, any taxpayer may choose to use the Real Regime, but cannot then change this decision for a period of three years from the date that RRA is informed of this choice.
The most important distinction of Real Regime is the rate applies to profit, not to turnover. This allows taxpayers to deduct expenses allowances against the income. For more details on the additional differences of Real Regime, see page 115.

In addition, it is important to note that unlike the other Income Tax regimes, the tax rate for Real Regime is slightly different for PIT and for CIT.
The tax rate for CIT is a uniform rate of 30% on the profit. The tax rate for PIT is progressive, as shown below:
Annual taxable income (profit)
Marginal PIT Rate
FRW 0 - FRW 360,000
0%
FRW 360,001 - FRW 1,200,000
20%
Above FRW 1,200,001
30%
It is important to note that these tax rates are marginal. This means that for each Real Regime PIT taxpayer each year, the first FRW 360,000 that they earn is taxed at 0%, the next FRW 840,000 is taxed at 20% and any remaining income is taxed at 30%. This means that no taxpayer is made worse off by receiving income in a higher tax bracket.




Real Regime can only be declared using E-Tax, see page 138 for more details on the process.
Small taxpayers who opt to pay tax on actual profit are able to avail of a simplified accounting method. These taxpayers are required to record:
- A record of all daily sales.
- A record of all daily purchases.
- A record of all monetary transactions.
What is the Motor Vehicle Income Tax?
The Motor Vehicle Income Tax is available to taxpayers who receive motor vehicle transport income. This means that taxpayers who receive income for transporting goods or passengers may declare and pay a specific rate per quarter depending upon the type of motor vehicle.
Motor Vehicle Income Tax must be declared on a mobile phone using M-Declaration or with the help of staff at RRA offices. This is intended to make it easier for self- employed moto/taxi/bus/truck drivers to declare and pay their taxes. See page 126 for the process on declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax using M-Declaration.

This process is the same as for declaring Motor Vehicle Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP). Taxpayers can declare and pay Motor Vehicle IQPs from as soon as the taxable activities start, therefore the tax rate below is described per quarter.
If the taxpayer receives additional income that is not from motor vehicle transport, this must be declared separately.

The tax rate per quarter for the different types of motor vehicle are displayed below.



Type of Motor Vehicle
Tax Rate per Quarter
Motorcycle cc below 100
FRW 9,000
Motorcycle cc above 100
FRW 18,000
Car
FRW 22,050
Bus/Minibus
FRW 3,000 per seat capacity
Pick-up/Truck with maximum load capacity below 7 tonnes
FRW 15,000 per tonne of capacity, rounded to the nearest half-tonne
Pick-up/Truck with maximum load capacity between 7 - 30 tonnes
FRW 19,500 per tonne of capacity, rounded to the nearest half-tonne
Private Ambulance/ Hearse
FRW 25,000
Wheeled construction/ breakdown/ towing vehicle
FRW 76,800
Caterpillar-tracked vehicle
FRW 195,000


What is M-Declaration?
M-Declaration is a system designed to allow certain types of taxpayers to declare Income Tax through their mobile phones. This is particularly focused at lower-income taxpayers, declaring Flat Tax or Lump Sum regimes, or taxpayers declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax. The types Income Tax that can be declared using M-Declaration are displayed diagrammatically on page 111.
The process for declaring using M-Declaration is slightly different when declaring Flat Tax or Lump Sum Income Tax compared to Motor Vehicle Income Tax, see pages 123 and 126 respectively for more details.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT)


Which types of Income Tax are declared using E-Tax or M-Declaration?


When is the deadline to declare and pay Income Tax?
Income Tax is required to be declared and paid on an annual basis. The tax period is the calendar year, from 1st January until 31st December. The deadline to declare and pay Income Tax by is 31st March of the following year.

If they have strong reasons, a CIT registered taxpayer may request to change their tax period to any other twelve (12) month period. The taxpayer must continue to declare and pay as normal until the request is approved.
In addition, Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQPs) are required to be declared and paid within three months by the deadlines of the following 30th June, 30th September and 31st December. IQPs are explained in more detail below.
What are Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQPs)?
In addition to the annual Income Tax declaration, Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQPs) are required to be declared and paid equal to one-quarter (1/4) of the annual tax payable by the deadlines of the following 30th June, 30th September and 31st December. All IQP Income

Tax that is paid can then claimed back in the following year's annual Income Tax declarations.
IQP declarations can be declared using M-Declaration or E-Tax, see page 123 and 156 respectively for more details. It is important to note that only declarations using E-Tax can deduct withholding taxes paid on behalf of the taxpayer within the preceding quarter, see page 156 for more details.
Example 19
Jean-Baptiste declares Income Tax payable of FRW 120,000 in March 2019. His IQP is calculated by:
FRW 120,000 / 4 = FRW 30,000
Jean-Baptiste must declare and pay IQP of FRW 30,000 each quarter by the deadline of 30th June 2019, 30th September 2019 and 31st December 2019.
However, in August 2019 he pays WHT 5% of FRW 18,000. This is deducted against the IQP of the following quarter. Therefore, his IQP due by 31st December 2019 is equal to:
FRW 30,000 - FRW 18,000 = FRW 12,000.
Overall, Jean-Baptiste has paid IQP of FRW 30,000 + FRW 30,000 + FRW 12,000 = FRW 72,000.
In the March 2020 annual Income Tax declaration Jean- Baptiste deducts FRW 72,000 of IQP and FRW 18,000 WHT 5% paid during the tax period.

What if tax is withheld on behalf of the taxpayer?
A taxpayer may have had tax withheld and paid on their behalf from the following tax types:
- Withholding tax of 15% (WHT 15%)
- Withholding tax of 3% (WHT 3%)
- Withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%)
- Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
- Gaming Tax
- Tax on Minerals
If any of those tax types have been withheld and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period, the tax paid may be claimed back in their Income Tax declarations. This can only be claimed when declaring using E-Tax, see page 131 for more details on the withholding annexures.
If this results in a refund situation, see page 41 for details.
When do taxpayers declare Capital Gains Tax instead?
Capital gains refers to the sale or transfer of commercial immovable property, or profit from the sale of shares.
If a taxpayer receives taxable capital gains, and is registered for Income Tax, the taxpayer must declare these as income within the Income Tax declarations.
If a taxpayer receives taxable capital gains and is not registered for Income Tax, nor required to register for Income Tax, the taxpayer must register and declare Capital Gains Tax at RRA offices, see page 288 for details.

Real Regime Details
There are aspects of Real Regime Income Tax that do not apply to the other regimes. These are discussed in turn below. The process of declaring Real Regime Income Tax is described on page 138. The formula for calculation of Real Regime Income Tax is summarised on page 155.
What expenses can be deducted in Real Regime?
Expenses are allowed to be deducted in Real Regime if they meet all of the following criteria:
- They are incurred for the direct purpose of the business and are directly chargeable to the income.
- They correspond to a real expense and can be substantiated with proper documents.
- They lead to a decrease in the net assets of the business.
- They are used for activities related to the tax period in which they are incurred.
For example, this includes employee expenses and RSSB contributions on behalf of the employee, office supplies, rent costs, utility costs, advertising costs, insurance costs and legal fees. It also includes Board attendance fees, although companies are required to withhold 30% on these allowances.
The types of expenses that are not tax deductible include:

- Dividends declared and paid-out profit shares.
- Fines and similar penalties.
- Donations and gifts exceeding 1% of the turnover as well as all donations given to profit oriented persons or enterprises.
- Any taxes paid.
- Personal consumption expenses.
- Entertainment expenses.
- Management fees, technical and royalty fees to non-residents in excess of 2% of the company's turnover.
What is the basis of depreciation in Real Regime?
Depreciation reflects the reduction of the value of an asset over time, in particular because of wear and tear.
Assets purchased with the value below FRW 500,000 are considered as expenses and cannot be depreciated. Depreciation of all other business assets can be deducted in Real Regime on the basis described below.
The cost of purchasing, constructing and improving buildings, equipment and heavy machinery that is fixed in walls depreciates by 5% annually of the cost price.
The cost of purchasing, constructing and improving intangible assets that have been purchased from a third party depreciates by 10% annually of the cost price.

The assets in the following two categories are depreciated in a pooling system on the basis of the following rates:
- Computers and accessories, information and communication systems, software products and data equipment depreciates at the rate of 50%.
- All other business assets (that have not otherwise been mentioned) depreciate at the rate of 25%.
The pooling system means that all similar items of these categories can be aggregated and the cost depreciated as single items.
Land, fine arts, antiquities, jewellery and any other assets that are not subject to wear and tear and cannot become outdated or obsolete are not depreciated.
What is the investment allowance in Real Regime for registered investors?
A registered investor, as designated by Rwanda Development Board (RDB), may deduct 40% of the investment amount in new or used assets if:
- the amount of business assets invested is more than FRW 30,000,000.
- the business assets are held at the establishment for at least three (3) tax periods.
The investment allowance becomes 50% if the registered business is located outside Kigali or falls within the

priority sectors determined by the Investment Code of Rwanda.
The investment allowance reduces the acquisition or construction cost, as well as the basic depreciation value of pooled business assets.
What other incentives are available for Real Regime?
There are additional exemptions or discounts that can be applied if the taxpayer fulfils certain criteria. The types of tax discounts allowed are subject to the Investment Code and Law on Direct Taxes on Income, see the Rwanda Development Board (RDB) and RRA websites respectively for the latest versions of these laws.
What if a Real Regime taxpayer does not make a profit?
If a taxpayer's taxable income (as calculated on page 155) is less than zero, this is referred to as a net loss. If a taxpayer declares a net loss in an Income Tax declaration, this loss may be carried forward and deducted from the Income Tax declarations of the next five tax periods, with earlier losses being deducted before later losses.
In addition, a taxpayer who declares a net loss in their Income Tax declaration is not required to declare and pay IQP for that tax period.

What are the related persons and transfer pricing requirements?
A 'related person' refers to any individual(s) who acts or is likely to act in accordance with the directive, opinions or wishes, communicated or not communicated, of other individual(s). This includes:
- An individual and their spouse, direct lineal ascendants (i.e. parents or grandparents) or descendants (i.e. children or grandchildren).
- A company and any individual or company who owns directly or indirectly 50% or more, by value or number, of the voting rights in the company.
Any transactions between related persons is required to be entered into the Transfer Pricing tab. This tab is required to be completed and uploaded with all Real Regime declarations, regardless of whether the taxpayer transacted with related persons, see page 143 for details.

What are the additional documents required for declaring Real Regime?
As well as the Real Regime annexures, three additional documents are required to be submitted for Real Regime declarations. This means that when downloading annexures for Real Regime PIT or CIT declarations, the taxpayer must download the
following annexures:
- PIT/CIT - Real
- Balance Sheet
- Profit and Loss
- Company Representative
These annexures can each be downloaded as normal. See page 77 for more details on downloading annexures.
The process of completing, validating and saving is different for the balance sheet, profit and loss statement and the company representative and is described in more detail below.
The balance sheet and profit and loss statements typically require the expertise of trained accountants. However, the taxpayer is ultimately responsible for the accurate completion of these documents.

Balance Sheet
A balance sheet is a financial statement summarising the assets, liabilities and capital at the end of the tax period.
In order to upload this annexure, the balance sheet spreadsheet must be saved as 'Balance_sheet_1.1.xlsm'.
Profit and Loss
A profit and loss statement is a financial statement summarising the revenues, costs and expenses incurred during a tax period.
In order to upload this annexure, the profit and loss spreadsheet must be saved as 'PL_STMT_1.1.xlsm.
Company Representative
The taxpayer must nominate at least one individual to represent the company. The nominated individual(s) should be available for contact, and be able to stand for the company in any correspondence or tax matters.
The nominated individual(s) can be the owner, shareholder or employee within the company, or even external to the company, such as private tax advisors.
Taxpayers are encouraged to provide more than one company representative to ensure that any important communication between RRA and the taxpayer can be quickly transmitted.

What are the additional requirements for 'Certified Financial Statements'?
A taxpayer with annual turnover of equal to or above FRW 400,000,000 is also required to submit 'Certified Financial Statements'.
To submit certified financial statements, the balance sheet and profit and loss statement, as well as any supporting documents, must be validated by qualified accounting professionals recognised by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants Rwanda (ICPAR) and approved by RRA.
After validation, the certified financial statements must be scanned and uploaded with the other annexures and documents.

Declaring Flat Tax, Lump Sum and IQP Income Tax using M-Declaration
If Income Tax is the taxpayer's only registered domestic tax type, and if the taxpayer has a Rwandan ID in the case of PIT, the taxpayer may declare Flat Tax or Lump Sum using M-Declaration. If not, Flat Tax and Lump Sum Income Tax can always be declared using E-Tax.
The process for declaring Flat Tax, Lump Sum and IQP Income Tax on a mobile phone using M-Declaration is explained below.
M-Declaration Process
The first time a taxpayer uses M-Declaration from that specific mobile phone, the taxpayer must first register.
The M-Declaration system for both registering and declaring is accessed by dialling *800#. The M- Declaration system has a series of screens, with number options, that are navigated by entering and sending the relevant number.
The first screen requests the taxpayer to select a language, either English or Kinyarwanda. The next screen requests to select which M-Declaration service is required. To declare Flat Tax, Lump Sum and IQP Income Tax select '2. Other Business Activities'.

The next screen shows the 'Welcome to Domestic Taxes' menu. This menu offers three options:
- 1. Registration
- 2. Declaration
- 3. Change Mobile Number
Register for M-Declaration
From the 'Welcome to Domestic Taxes' menu, select '1. Registration' to begin the registration process.
The details required for registration are:
- Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN)
- Rwanda National ID number
For PIT registered taxpayers, their Rwanda National ID number is required. It is not currently possible to use passports to declare PIT using M-Declaration, E-Tax must be used instead.
For CIT registered taxpayers (of any nationality), the Rwanda National ID number can be entered as '9999999999999999' (sixteen '9's).
Submit the required details in the relevant screens to register for M-Declaration of Flat Tax, Lump Sum and IQP Income Tax.
M-Declaration of Income Tax
From the 'Welcome to Domestic Taxes' menu, select '2. Declaration' to begin the declaration process.

The taxpayer must have already registered the TIN with mobile phone that they are declaring from. In addition, they must select:
- Whether they are a new taxpayer, meaning if this is their first Income Tax declaration of any kind.
- The business turnover or total sales during the tax period being declared.
- The year and quarter for the tax period which is being declared.
o For example, for annual declarations that are due by 31st March 2017 are for the year of '2016' and quarter 'annual'.
o For example, for IQP declarations that are due by 30th June 2017 for the preceding quarter are for the year of '2017' and quarter '1'.
Based on this turnover, the system calculates the tax to be paid, and generates the RRA Reference Number required for paying taxes. For more details on paying taxes, see page 407.

Declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax using M-Declaration
Taxpayers who receive income from motor vehicle transportation of passengers or goods are able to declare this separately for each motor vehicle. This can only be done on a mobile phone using M-Declaration or with the help of staff at RRA offices.
The process for declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax using M-Declaration is described below.
M-Declaration of Motor Vehicle Income Tax
The M-Declaration system for declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax is accessed by dialling *800#. The M- Declaration has a series of screens, with number options, that are navigated by entering and sending the relevant number.
The first screen requests to select a language, either English or Kinyarwanda. After selecting a language, the next screen requests to select which M-Declaration service, to declare Motor Vehicle Income Tax, select '1. Motor Cycles/Vehicles'.
The taxpayer must then select:
- The unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN).
- The number plate of the motor vehicle.
- Whether they are a new taxpayer, meaning if this is their first Income Tax declaration of any kind.

- The tax year and quarter for the period which is being declared.
o For example, for annual declarations that are due by 31st March 2017 are for the tax year of '2016' and quarter '4'.
o For example, for IQP declarations that are due by 30th June 2017 are for the tax year of '2017' and quarter '1'.
Based on the type of motor vehicle registered to the number plate, the system then selects the Income Tax to be paid, and generates the RRA Reference Number required for paying taxes. For more details on paying taxes, see page 407.

Declaring Flat Tax Income Tax using E-Tax
Flat Tax regime Income Tax can be declared using E-Tax or M-Declaration. If the taxpayer is registered for other domestic tax types as well as Income Tax, then Flat Tax regime must be declared using E-Tax, instead of M- Declaration.
The declaration process for Flat Tax regime using E-Tax is similar to other domestic taxes, see page 77 for details.
However, the process of declaring Flat Tax regime is even simpler as there are no annexures. The taxpayer only has to complete the declaration form and submit the declaration.
Flat Tax Declaration Form
Firstly, this requires logging into E-Tax and entering the declaration form, see page 77 for more details on choosing the applicable declaration.
The Flat Tax regime declaration form for PIT or CIT has five fields. The only field that must be entered is:
Annual Turnover - Enter the turnover of the business during the tax year.
The other fields are automatically filled by the system, where applicable. After entering the required information, click save to calculate the 'Annual Flat Amount of Tax Due' automatically.



After checking that the fields entered are correct, click 'Submit without Annexures' to submit the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click to 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Declaring Lump Sum Income Tax using E-Tax
Lump Sum regime Income Tax can be declared using E- Tax or M-Declaration. If the taxpayer is registered for other domestic tax types as well as Income Tax, then Lump Sum regime must be declared using E-Tax, instead of M-Declaration.
The declaration process for Lump Sum regime using E- Tax is similar to other domestic taxes, see page 77 for details.
Firstly, if the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, they must download the Lump Sum annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more details on downloading annexures. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT annexure, but the details required are the same.
If the taxpayer has not had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, they can continue straight to the Lump Sum declaration, see page 133.
Annexures
The Lump Sum regime annexure has two tabs. Only the tabs that are applicable in that tax period need to be completed, validated and saved. See page 79 if there are any problems when validating annexures.

Withholding 5% Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has paid withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%) during the tax period. This does not include any other types of withholding tax, which must be declared in the 'Withholding' tab.
Customs Station - Enter the border post where the goods or services were imported. This is listed under the 'Office of Destination' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Customs Declaration (DD COM No) - Enter the unique customs declaration number, for example: 'C39012'. This is listed under the 'Customs Reference' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Customs Declaration Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the importation, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted. This is listed next to the 'Customs Reference' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Nature of Goods - Enter a brief description of the goods that have been imported. This is listed in the 'Packages and descriptions of goods' section in the middle of the customs declaration.
Origin - Enter the name of the country where the goods or services first came from. This means that if a product

first comes from the United Kingdom but arrives via boat to Kenya and lorry through Uganda to the Gatuna border, the origin country is United Kingdom. This is listed under the 'Country of Origin' or 'Cty. orig. Code' in the middle of the customs declaration.
Customs Value (CIF) - Enter the value of the goods or services upon entering Rwanda. CIF stands for Cost, Insurance and Freight which means that this value includes the cost of the goods and services from when they originated, but also includes the costs of insurance and freight or transport in getting the goods to Rwanda. This is listed in Rwandan Francs under the 'Statistical Value' in the middle-right of the customs declaration.
5 Withheld in Custom - Enter the tax withheld on the imports. This is equal to the 'W01' Amount in the 'Calculation of Taxes' section in the middle of the customs declaration.
Withholding Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayers who have had tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period. This includes WHT 15%, WHT 3%, Gaming Tax and Tax on Minerals. This does not include WHT 5% on imports which is included in the 'Withholding 5%' tab.
Withholdee's TIN - Enter the TIN of the withholding taxpayer who has withheld and paid tax on behalf of the declaring taxpayer.

Withholdee's Name - Enter the taxpayer name of the
withholding taxpayer.
Invoice/Transaction No - Enter the unique invoice number of the transaction that the tax was withheld on.
Date of Withholding (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the invoice, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Nature of Goods/Services - Enter a brief description of the goods or services on which the tax was withheld.
Amount on Which to Withhold - Enter the amount of the invoice on which withholding was applied, excluding taxes.
Rate Used - Enter the rate of tax that was withheld, without the percentage symbol. For example, withholding tax of 3% should be entered as '3'.
Amount Withheld - Enter the amount of tax that was withheld. This should equal 'Amount on Which to Withhold' multiplied by 'Rate Used'%.
Lump Sum Declaration
After all applicable Lump Sum annexures (if any) have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the Lump Sum declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant

declaration. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT declaration, but the details required are the same.
The Lump Sum declaration form requires data on:
Business income/sales - Enter the turnover of the business during the tax year.
Transport Income - Enter the total motor vehicle transport income, excluding any that has been declared separately through M-Declaration. See page 126 for more details on declaring motor vehicle transport income through M-Declaration.
Quarterly Prepayments - This field is automatically filled with the Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) that the taxpayer has paid in advance of this declaration.
Withholding on Imports - Enter the amount of WHT 5% that has been withheld on behalf of the taxpayer. This should equal the total combined values in the 'Withholding 5%' annexure.
Withholding on Public Tenders - Enter the amount of all other types of withholding that has been withheld on behalf of the taxpayer. This should equal the total combined values in the 'Withholding' annexure.
Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.



After saving the Lump Sum regime declaration form, if the taxpayer has not had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, click 'Submit without Annexures' to submit the declaration.
If the taxpayer has had tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, click 'Continue with Upload Annexures'. Upload the annexures and then compare with the declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.




Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.


Click to 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Declaring Real Regime Income Tax using E-Tax
Real Regime Income Tax must be declared using E-Tax.
The declaration process for Real Regime using E-Tax is similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 77. The process is similar whether the tax type is PIT or CIT.
Firstly, download the Real Regime annexures from the E- Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT annexure, but the details required are the same.
However, in addition to the annexures, three additional documents are required to be submitted. These are the:
- Profit and Loss Account
- Balance Sheet
- Company Representative
In addition, if the taxpayer's annual turnover is above FRW 400,000,000, the 'Certified Financial Statements' annexure must also be uploaded. For more details on these additional documents, see page 120.
Annexures
The Real Regime annexure file has seven tabs. The 'Transfer Pricing' tab must always be completed, even if there are no applicable transactions, see page 143 for more details. The other tabs only need to completed,

validated and saved if applicable to the taxpayer in that tax period. See page 77 if there are any problems when validating annexures.
Depreciation Table Tab
This tab refers to the depreciation that is allowed to be deducted, see page 116 for more details.
Buildings, equipment, heavy machinery and intangible assets that have been purchased from a third party must be listed as individual rows.
Computers and accessories, information and communication systems, software products and data equipment can be pooled and entered as a single row.
All other depreciable business assets (that have not otherwise been mentioned) can be pooled and entered as a single row.
Description - Enter a description of the depreciable assets owned by the business.
Book Value Beginning of Period - Enter the book value of any assets that were already owned by the business at the beginning of the tax period. The book value includes any depreciation from previous tax periods.
Acquisition During the Period - Enter the cost price of any assets that were purchased by the business during the tax period.

Disposition During the Period - Enter the book value of any assets that were sold or disposed of by the business during the tax period.
Rate - Enter the rate of depreciation for the type of business assets, without the percentage symbol. For example, depreciation of 10% should be entered as '10'.
Depreciation Allowance for the Period - Enter the value of depreciation allowed to be deducted. This should equal ('Book Value Beginning of Period' + 'Acquisition During the Period' - 'Disposition During the Period') multiplied by 'Rate'.
Book Value End of the Period - Enter the book value of any assets at the end of the tax period. This should equal ('Book Value Beginning of Period' + 'Acquisition During the Period' - 'Disposition During the Period') - 'Depreciation Allowance for the Period'.
Tax Discounts Tab
This tab refers to tax discounts allowed for within the Rwanda Investment Code and Income Tax law. Each type of tax discount requires a separate row.
Allowance Type - Enter the type of tax discount.
Amount on which to Apply Allowances - Enter the amount on which the discount is applied.
Rate Used - Enter the rate of the tax discount.

Amount of Allowance - Enter the amount of the discount allowed to be deducted. This should equal 'Amount on which to Apply Allowances' multiplied by 'Rate Used'%.
Withholding Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayers who have had tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period. This includes WHT 15%, WHT 3%, Gaming Tax and Tax on Minerals. This does not include WHT 5% on imports which is included in the 'Withholding 5%' tab.
The details required to enter the withholding tab are the same as described on page 132.
Withholding 5% Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has paid withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%) during the tax period. This does not include any other types of withholding tax, which must be declared in the 'Withholding' tab.
The details required to enter the withholding 5% tab are the same as described on page 131.
Debtors Tab
This tab refers to any debts or loans that are owed to the taxpayer in terms of their business. This does not include personal debts owed to the taxpayer as an individual. Each debt requires a separate row.

Tin of the Debtor - Enter the TIN of the taxpayer who owes the debt, if applicable.
Debtor's Name - Enter the taxpayer name who owes the debt, if applicable, or the name of the individual if not.
Description - Enter a brief description of the context and terms of the debt.
Date of Liability (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date that the debt began, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Amount Owed - Enter the amount of the debt that is owed by the debtor, including any interest.
Creditors Tab
This tab refers to any debts or loans that are owed by the taxpayer in terms of their business. This does not include personal debts owed by the taxpayer as an individual. Each credit requires a separate row.
TIN of the Creditor - Enter the TIN of the taxpayer who is owed the debt, if applicable.
Creditor's Name - Enter the taxpayer name, if applicable, or the name of the individual who is owed the debt.
Description - Enter a brief description of the context and terms of the debt.

Date of Liability (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date that the debt began, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Amount Owed - Enter the amount of the debt that is owed to the creditor, including any interest.
Transfer Pricing Tab
This tab must be completed, saved and uploaded by all taxpayers. This is particularly applicable to any taxpayer who has made transactions with any 'related persons', see page 119 for more details. Each transaction requires a separate row.
It is important to note that this tab must be completed, saved and uploaded even if there are no applicable transactions. If this is the case, complete a single row entering 'None' for all columns, with the exception of 'Date of transaction (dd/mm/yyyy)' and 'Amount paid' where the final date of the tax year, eg. '31/12/2017' and '0' should be entered respectively.
Name of the company transacted with - Enter the name of the company of the 'related persons' transacted with.
Location - Enter the registered country of the company of the 'related persons' transacted with.
Nature of transaction (goods or services) - Enter whether the transaction was for 'goods' or 'services'.

Type of goods or service supplied - Enter a brief description of the goods or services that have been transacted.
Date of transaction (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the transaction in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Invoice number - Enter the unique invoice number of the transaction.
Amount paid - Enter the amount paid in the transaction, excluding any taxes.
Real Regime Declaration Form
After all applicable and required Real Regime Annexures been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the Real Regime declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT declaration, but the details required are similar.
The Real Regime declaration form requires data on:
Business Income - Enter the total income generated by activities within the core operating activities of the business, i.e. the turnover or total sales.

Cost of Goods Sold - Enter the total of all costs used to produce goods or services which gave been sold. This can be calculated as:
Cost of Goods Sold = Opening Stock + Purchases - Closing Stock.
Opening Stock - Enter the cost of inventory at the start of the tax period.
Purchases - Enter the cost of all inventory purchased during the tax period.
Closing Stock - Enter the cost of all inventory at the end of the tax period.
Where 'inventory' is defined as assets that are intended to be used or sold in the ordinary course of business, including inputs and finished products.
Operating Expenses - CIT only - Enter the total of all expenses associated with the general, sales, and administrative functions of an entity. See page 115 for more details on deductible and not tax deductible expenses.
Depreciation - CIT only - Enter the total depreciation on business assets during the tax period. See page 116 for the calculation of depreciation.
Expenses - PIT only - Enter the total of both 'Operating Expenses' and 'Depreciation' as described above.

Employment Income - PIT only - Enter the total employment income received by the taxpayer.
Investment Income - Enter the total investment income. This includes all payments in cash or in kind in the form of interest, dividends or royalties. In the majority of cases, this will already have been paid as a Withholding Tax, but must still be declared, and then claimed back.
Transport Income - PIT only - Enter the total motor vehicle transport income, excluding any that has been declared separately through M-Declaration. See page 126 for more details on declaring motor vehicle transport income through M-Declaration.
Non-Operating and Extraordinary Income - Enter the total income generated by activities outside of the core operating activities of a business and that are unlikely to recur in the foreseeable future.
Rental Income - CIT only - Enter the total income received in cash or in kind from the rental or leasing of machinery, equipment, land, buildings and livestock.
It is important to note that rental income for land and buildings received by PIT taxpayers must be declared separately as Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees, see page 314 for more details.
Rental income that from other assets received by PIT taxpayers must be entered in the 'Business Income/Sales' field.

Employment Deductions - PIT only - Enter any exempt employment income, if this amount has also been included in the 'Employment Income' field. See page 165 for more details on exempt employment income.
Investment Expenses - Enter any expenses relating to maintenance or ownership with the objective of earning future investment income in the form of interest, dividend, royalty or rent. This includes carrying charges and interest expenses.
Transport Expenses - PIT only - Enter any expenses relating to motor vehicle transport income, if they have not been included in the 'Expenses' field.
Non-Operating and Extraordinary Expenses - Enter the total expenses incurred by activities outside of the core operating activities of a business and that are unlikely to recur in the foreseeable future.
Training and Research Expenses - Enter the total training and research expenses that are incurred for the direct purpose of the business. This does not include any purchases or improvements of immovable property or exploration assets.
Investment Allowances - Enter the total investment allowances available to registered investors only. See page 117 for more details on investment allowances.

Bad Debts - Enter the total deduction allowed for bad debts. A deduction is only allowed if the following criteria are met:
- an amount corresponding to the debt was previously declared as income.
- the debt is written off in the books of the taxpayer.
- for debts of FRW 3,000,000 or more, the taxpayer has taken all possible steps in pursing payment and has shown proof that the debtor is insolvent.
- for debts less than FRW 3,000,000, the taxpayer has taken all possible steps in pursuing payment over a period of three years.
Rental Expenses - CIT only - Enter the total deduction allowed for rental income from machinery, equipment, land and livestock. The deduction can include:
- 10% of the rental income as wear-and-tear expense.
- Interest paid on loans to purchase the rented items.
- Depreciation expenses equivalent to 5% annually of the cost price of the rented items.
Tax Paid on Minerals - Enter any Tax on Minerals paid during the tax period. See page 278 for more details on Tax on Minerals.

Reintegration of Expenses Not Tax Deductible - Enter any expenses that are not tax deductible, if this amount has also been included in the 'Expenses' field. See page 115 for more details for the types of expenses that are not tax deductible.
Depreciation Adjustments - Enter the difference between the depreciation entered in the 'Depreciation' field, and the depreciation basis allowed, if applicable. See page 116 for more details on the depreciation basis.
Fiscal Loss Carried Forward - Enter the total deduction allowed for losses declared, but not yet deducted, in the previous five (5) tax periods. Losses can be deducted against profits, with earlier losses being deducted before later losses.
Non Taxable Dividends Received - CIT only - Enter the total income of dividends received by the taxpayer, that have already had tax withheld and paid on their behalf.
Tax Discounts - Enter any tax discounts allowed for the taxpayer. The types of tax discounts allowed are subject to change in the Investment Code, see the Rwanda Development Board (RDB) for the latest versions of these laws.
Foreign Tax Credit - Enter any tax that has been paid on income derived from taxable activities performed abroad that can be substantiated with proof.

Quarterly Prepayments - This field is automatically filled with the Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) that the taxpayer has already paid corresponding to this tax period.
Withholding on Imports - Enter any tax that has been withheld on imports (WHT 5%) and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period.
Withholding on Public Supplies - Enter any tax that has been withheld on public supplies (WHT 3%) and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period.
Withholding on Other Payments - Enter any tax that has been withheld on other payments and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period.
Withholding on payments (PAYE) - PIT only - Enter any Pay As You Earn (PAYE) that has been withheld and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period.
Overpayment from Previous Periods - Enter if any previous tax declarations have been found to have been overpaid.
Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.





After saving the declaration form, upload the annexures and then compare with the Real Regime declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.
It is important to note that the following annexures must be uploaded with all Real Regime declarations:
- Balance Sheet Annexure
- Profit & Loss A/c Annexure
- Company Representative
- Related Party Transactions (Transfer Pricing tab)
In addition, if the taxpayer's annual turnover is above FRW 400,000,000, the 'Certified Financial Statements' annexure must also be uploaded. See page 120 for more details on these documents. Finally, all relevant annexures must also be uploaded.




Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click to 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT)


Real Regime Declaration Form Calculation Summary

Gross Profit
= Business Income/Sales - Cost of Goods Sold
Net Operating
Income or Loss
= Gross Profit - Total Expenses and Depreciation
Total Income
= Net Operating Income or Loss + Additional Income
Total Deductions
= Additional Expenses + Investment Allowance + Bad Debts + Tax Paid on Minerals
Net Income
= Total Income - Total Deductions
Taxable Income
= Net Income + Reintegration of Non-Deductible Expenses + Depreciation Adjustments + Loss Carried Forward From Previous Five Tax Periods + Non Taxable Dividend Received
CIT / PIT payable
= (Taxable Income * CIT / PIT tax rates) - All Tax Discounts
Total Credits
= Foreign Tax Credit + Quarterly Prepayments + All Withholdings
Net Tax Due
= CIT / PIT Payable - Total Credits - Overpayments from Previous
Periods
Declaring Instalment Quarterly Prepayment (IQP) Income Tax
IQP Income Tax can be declared using M-Declaration or using E-Tax. An important consideration is that any withholding tax that has been withheld and paid on behalf of the taxpayer during the tax period can only be claimed back when using E-Tax.
Declaring IQP using M-Declaration
The process for declaring IQP using M-Declaration is explained on page 123. In addition, the process of declaring Motor Vehicle IQP using M-Declaration is explained on page 126.
Declaring IQP using E-Tax
The declaration process for IQP using E-Tax is similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 77. The process is the same whether declaring the tax type is PIT or CIT and for each of the regimes.
Firstly, if the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, they must download the IQP Annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT annexure, but the details required are the same.

If the taxpayer has not had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, they can continue straight to the IQP declaration form below.
Annexures
The IQP annexure has two tabs. Only the tabs that are applicable in that tax period need to be completed, validated and saved. See page 79 if the taxpayer has any problems when validating annexures.
5% Withholding Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has paid withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%) during the tax period. This does not include any other types of withholding tax, which must be declared in the 'Withholding' tab.
The details required to enter the withholding tab are the same as described on page 131.
Withholding Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayers who have had tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period. This includes WHT 15%, WHT 3%, Gaming Tax and Tax on Minerals. This does not include WHT 5% on imports which is included in the 'Withholding 5%' tab.
The details required to enter the withholding tab are the same as described on page 132.

IQP Declaration Form
After all applicable IQP annexures (if any) have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the IQP declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration. The taxpayer must choose the relevant PIT or CIT declaration, but the details required are the same.
The IQP declaration form requires data on:
Income Tax Payable - Enter the 'Income Tax Payable' declared in the previous annual Income Tax declaration.
Total Withholding on Payments (3%) - Enter the amount of WHT 3% that has been withheld on behalf of the taxpayer.
Total Withholding on Imports (5%) - Enter the amount of WHT 5% that has been withheld on behalf of the taxpayer. This should equal the total combined values in the 'Withholding 5%' annexure.
Total Withholding on other Payments (15% and/or 10%) - Enter the amount of all other withholdings that have been withheld on behalf of the taxpayer. This includes WHT 15%, Gaming Tax and Tax on Minerals. This does not include WHT 5% or WHT 3%.
Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.



After saving the IQP regime declaration form, if the taxpayer has not had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, click 'Submit without Annexures' to submit the declaration.
If the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, upload the IQP annexures and then compare with the declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.



Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.


Click to 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT) Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for Income Tax are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. These apply equally to PIT or CIT and annual or IQP declarations. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
There are no additional penalties or fines specifically applicable to Income Tax.

Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
Explanation of PAYE
What is PAYE?
PAYE is tax on employment income. PAYE is an efficient way of collecting taxes on income earned by employees.
PAYE is required to be withheld by employers on behalf of their employees. This is to save employees having to each declare their own income. Instead, the employers must declare and pay PAYE on behalf of their employees.
Similar to PAYE, Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB) contributions must be paid on employment income, see page 172 for more details.
Who must register for PAYE?
Any taxpayer who pays its employees in cash, benefits- in-kind or allowances is required to register for PAYE and declare and pay PAYE on their employees' behalf.


In the event that an employer has special authorisation from the Government of Rwanda that they are not required to declare and pay taxes on income, see page 101, their employees are required to register with RRA, and declare and pay PAYE on their own behalf.
What are the obligations of PAYE registered taxpayers?
Employers are required to provide each employee with a statement each tax period showing:
- The employee's name.
- The amount and type(s) of income received.
- The amount of PAYE and RSSB contributions that have been withheld and paid on their behalf.
Which types of employment income are taxable?
Payments in cash refer to monetary payments in notes or electronically in any currency. Payments in kind refer to non-monetary payments of goods or services.
Taxable employment income includes all payments to an employee in cash or in kind such as:
- Wages, salary, leave pay, sick pay and medical allowance, payment in lieu of leave, fees, commissions, bonuses, gratuity and incentives.
- Allowances including any cost of living, subsistence, entertainment, accommodation, rent, or travel allowance.

- Payments to the employee for their acceptance to work in any conditions of employment.
- Payments for redundancy, loss or termination of employment.
- Other payments made in respect of current, previous or future employment.
Which types of employment income are exempt?
Employment income that is exempt from taxation includes:
- Reimbursement of expenses incurred by the employee if wholly and exclusively for business activities of the employer.
- Retirement contributions or pension payments made by the employer on behalf of the employee to Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB).
- Retirement contributions made by the employer on behalf of the employee and/or contributions made by the employee to a qualified pension fund to a maximum of 10% of the employee's employment income or FRW 1,200,000 per year, whichever is lower.
- Employment income received by an employee who is not a citizen of Rwanda from a foreign government or NGO under an agreement signed by the Government of Rwanda and when the income is received in performance of aid services in Rwanda.

What is the valuation method for benefits in kind?
Benefits in kind can be more difficult to value than regular employment income. As a result, the valuation of benefits in kind includes:
- Providing an employee with access to and use of a motor vehicle during a tax period is valued at 10% of the employment income, excluding benefits in kind.
- Providing an employee with accommodation during a tax period is valued at 20% of the employment income, excluding benefits in kind.


What are the different types of employees?
There are three types of employees for the purposes of declaring PAYE. These are: permanent employees, casual labourers and employees with more than one employer.
All employees are regarded as permanent employees unless they fulfil the criteria for casual labourers or employees with more than one employer.
A casual labourer is an employee who performs unskilled labour activities, who does not use machinery or equipment requiring special skills, and who is engaged by an employer for not longer than thirty days during a tax period.
If an employee is employed by more than one employer, the employer who pays them the highest taxable income is referred to as the 'first employer'.
What are the tax rates for 'permanent' employees?
There are different marginal tax rates for permanent employees depending upon their taxable employment income. The groupings of income are called tax brackets. The tax rates for each tax bracket are:

Monthly taxable income
Marginal Tax Rate
FRW 0 to FRW 30,000
0%
FRW 30,001 to FRW 100,000
20%
Above FRW 100,001
30%
It is important to note that these tax rates are marginal. This means that for each person each month, the first FRW 30,000 that they earn is taxed at 0%, the next FRW 70,000 they earn is taxed at 20% and any remaining income is taxed at 30%. This means that no taxpayer is made worse off by receiving income in a higher tax bracket.
Example 29
Amahoro employs two full-time employees, Rukundo and Lucie. Rukundo's monthly taxable income is FRW 40,000. Lucie's monthly taxable income is FRW 160,000. Amahoro declares PAYE on their behalf.
Rukundo's FRW 40,000 taxable income is in the second tax bracket. The first FRW 30,000 is taxed at 0%, the remaining FRW 10,000 is taxed at 20%. The monthly PAYE tax due on behalf of Rukundo is:
(FRW 30,000 * 0)+ (FRW 10,000 * 20%) = FRW 0 + FRW
2,000 = FRW 2,000.
Lucie's FRW 160,000 taxable income is in the third tax bracket. The first FRW 30,000 is taxed at 0%, the next FRW 70,000 is taxed at 20%, the remaining FRW 60,000 is taxed at 30%. The monthly PAYE tax due on behalf of Lucie is:
(FRW 30,000 * 0)+ (FRW 70,000 * 20%) + (FRW 60,000 *
30%) = FRW 0 + FRW 14,000 + FRW 18,000 = FRW 32,000.

What are the tax rates for 'casual labourers'?
Similarly, there are different marginal tax rates for casual employees depending upon their taxable employment income. The groupings of income are called tax brackets. The tax rates for each tax bracket are:

Monthly taxable income
Marginal Tax Rate
FRW 0 to FRW 30,000
0%
Above FRW 30,001
15%

What are the tax rates for 'employees with more than one employer'?
The first employer declares the employee as a 'permanent employee' as normal. Any additional employers must withhold PAYE at the rate of 30% on all taxable income.

This may mean that the employee pays a higher amount of tax than would normally be expected if the income had come from just one employer. Resident individuals in Rwanda are able to claim a refund for excess Income Tax paid if the tax refund payable exceeds FRW 5,000.
Example 31
Charles works separately for two employers, Lucie and Fred. Charles receives monthly taxable income of FRW 45,000 from Lucie and FRW 50,000 from Fred. As he pays Charles the higher amount, Fred is the first employer who declares PAYE as normal on behalf of Charles. The PAYE due declared by Fred on behalf of Charles is:
(FRW 30,000 * 0) + (FRW 20,000 * 20%) = FRW 0 + FRW
4,000 = FRW 4,000
As Lucie is not the first employer of Charles, she withholds PAYE of 30% on Charles' monthly taxable income. Lucie withholds FRW 45,000 * 30% = FRW 13,500.
This is a higher marginal rate than if the income had come from just one employer. Charles is entitled to submit a Personal Income Tax (PIT) declaration to claim a tax refund if the tax refund payable is more than FRW 5,000.
When is the deadline to declare and pay PAYE?
PAYE is declared and paid on a monthly basis. Alternatively, taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 200,000,000 may request to declare on a quarterly basis.

Whether monthly or quarterly, the PAYE declaration must be submitted and any tax paid by the 15th of the month following the end of the tax period.
For monthly, this means that PAYE monthly declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 31st must be declared and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.
The quarters for taxpayers declaring PAYE on a quarterly basis concern the tax period between:
- March 1st to May 31st must be declared and paid by 15th June.
- June 1st to August 31st must be declared and paid by 15th September.
- September 1st to November 30th must be declared and paid by 15th December.
- December 1st to February 28th (or 29th if a leap year), must be declared and paid by 15th March.
However, it is important to note that even if PAYE is declared quarterly, RSSB contributions must still be declared on a monthly basis.
Are PAYE and RSSB contributions declared together?
PAYE and RSSB contributions can be declared together in a 'Unified PAYE declaration', or declared separately, see page 178 for more details.

Explanation of RSSB Contributions
What are RSSB contributions?
RSSB contributions are paid by all employees and employers and go towards providing social security schemes such as pensions, cover for work related accidents, diseases, medical services or disease compensation, or to provide maternity leave benefits.
This Tax Handbook focuses on how to register, declare and pay RSSB contributions. For more details on social security contributions, and how to claim the benefits, visit the RSSB website at: http://www.rssb.rw/.
Who collects RSSB contributions?
RRA is mandated to collect social security contributions on behalf of Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB). This is because social security contributions are also paid on the basis of employment income. Therefore, it makes it easier for taxpayers to declare PAYE and social security contributions on one portal at the same time. RRA then transfers all social security contributions directly to RSSB.
Who must register for RSSB Contributions?
All employers must register for the Pension Scheme, Occupational Hazards and Maternity Leave. Public institutions must also register for the Medical Scheme.
In addition, private enterprises may also voluntarily apply to register for the Medical Scheme. Individuals may also

voluntarily apply to join the Pension Scheme if they are not currently paying into the Pension Scheme.
When must a taxpayer register?
An employer is required to register with RSSB within seven (7) working days of starting a business.
All businesses are initially registered with RSSB when they register their business with RDB, see page 53 for more details on registering a business with RDB. This account is initially inactive, until the taxpayer hires any employees.
An employer is required to activate their RSSB account and register any employees within seven (7) working days of employing any new employee.
Employers can activate this account and register employees by visiting any RSSB offices. There is an RSSB office in each of the 30 districts in Rwanda. For the addresses of RSSB offices, see the RSSB website at: http://www.rssb.rw/.
What are the rates of the Pension Scheme?
The Pension Scheme totals a rate of 8%. This is made up of 3% withheld from the employee and 5% paid by the employer, including payments to the Occupational Hazards Scheme. This is charged on all employment income except for transport allowances and transport benefits in kind. Therefore, the Pension Base is equal to:

Pension Base = Basic Salary + Benefit in Kind House + Benefit in Kind Others + Cash Allowance House + Cash Allowance Others.
There is also a voluntary Pension Scheme for individuals not already paying in, see page 176 for more details.
For more details on the Pension Scheme and Occupational Hazards Scheme, see the RSSB website at:
http://www.rssb.rw/content/pension-scheme-0. http://www.rssb.rw/content/occupational-hazards. What are the rates of the Maternity Leave Scheme?
The Maternity Leave scheme totals a rate of 0.6%. This is made up of 0.3% withheld from the employee and 0.3% paid by the employer. This is charged on all employment income except for transport allowances and transport benefits in kind. Therefore, the Pension Base is equal to:
Pension Base = Basic Salary + Benefit in Kind House + Benefit in Kind Others + Cash Allowance House + Cash Allowance Others.


Example 32
Amahoro employs Innocent and pays him a basic salary of FRW 57,000 and a cash allowance of FRW 2,000 for transport and FRW 3,000 for airtime related to calls on behalf of the business.
Excluding the transport allowance, the pension base is:

-	FRW 57,000 + FRW 3,000 = FRW 60,000
The compulsory pension contributions include:

- FRW 60,000 * 3% = FRW 1,800 withheld on behalf of Innocent by Amahoro
- FRW 60,000 * 5% = FRW 3,000 paid by Amahoro
The maternity leave contributions include:

- FRW 60,000 * 0.3% = FRW 180 withheld on behalf of Innocent by Amahoro
- FRW 60,000 * 0.3% = FRW 180 paid by Amahoro
In total, Amahoro pays RSSB contributions of FRW 5,160 on behalf of Innocent. Of this, FRW 1,980 is withheld from Innocent's gross salary, whilst FRW 3,180 is directly paid
by Amahoro.
For more details on the benefits and requirements of the Maternity Leave Scheme, see the RSSB website at:
http://www.rssb.rw/content/maternity-leave.
What are the rates of the Medical Scheme?

The Medical Scheme totals a rate of 15%. This is made up of 7.5% withheld from the employee and 7.5% paid by the employer. This is charged on the 'Basic Salary'.
For more details on the benefits and requirements of the Medical Scheme, see the RSSB website at:
http://www.rssb.rw/content/medical-scheme.
What are the rates of the voluntary Pension Scheme?
The rate of the voluntary Pension Scheme is 6% of the fixed salary. For self-employed people, the salary can be fixed at any level. For people who have previously paid into the Pension Scheme, the salary can be fixed not more than 130% of the previous Pension base. The fixed salary cannot increase by more than 30% every three years.



When is the deadline for declaring and paying RSSB Contributions?
RSSB contributions must always be declared and paid on a monthly basis. The RSSB contributions relating to a 'tax period', must be declared and paid within fifteen (15) days of the end of the month.
This means that declarations concerning the employment income earned between March 1st and March 31st must be declared and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.

Declaring PAYE and RSSB Contributions
To facilitate taxpayers, RRA and Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB) have introduced a unified declaration, where PAYE and all RSSB contributions (except for voluntary Pension Scheme) can be declared together.
The original method of declaring PAYE and each of the RSSB contributions separately is still available. However, RRA is encouraging the use of the unified declaration, and recommends that any newly declaring taxpayers should use the unified declaration.
Therefore, this tax handbook focuses on the declaration process for the Unified PAYE and RSSB declaration.
The process for the original method is very similar, but must be repeated for each of the separate tax types and RSSB contributions. However, when selecting the declaration, instead click 'Tax
Declaration' for PAYE and 'RSSSB Contributions' for RSSB Contributions. This is also the case when declaring voluntary Pension Scheme contributions.
As with other tax types, taxpayers must first register to declare the Unified PAYE and RSSB declaration by calling the RRA call centre on 3004 or visiting RRA offices.
The declaration process for Unified PAYE and RSSB is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to

Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Unified PAYE-PENSION-MEDICAL Annexures
Firstly, download the Unified PAYE Annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures.
The Unified PAYE Annexure file has three tabs. Only the tabs that are applicable in that tax period need to be completed, validated and saved. See page 79 if the taxpayer has any problems when validating annexures.
PAYE Permanent Employees Tab
This tab is applicable for any employer of permanent employees, or for the main employer if an employee has more than one employer.
The PAYE Permanent Employees tab has 30 columns. However, the final 12 columns are calculated automatically when validating. Each row is for a separate employee. For each employee, enter details on:
Employee TIN - Enter the TIN of the employee, If applicable.
Employee SSN Number - Enter the employee's Social Security Number (SSN) from RSSB.
Employee National ID - Enter the employee's National Identity Document (ID) number.

Employee Last Name - Enter the family name of the employee.
Employee First Name - Enter the given name(s) of the employee.
Return Type, O - Original, R - Revised - Enter 'O' if the declaration has not yet been submitted, enter 'R' if this declaration is being revised after submitting.
Sex, M - Male, F - Female - Enter the gender of the employee. Enter 'M' if they are male, 'F' if female.
Medical Member "Y" or "N" - If the taxpayer is a registered Medical Insurance scheme member, enter 'Y' for all employees. If not, enter 'N' for all employees.
Start Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date that the employee started working. This must be entered in the format dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
End Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - If the employee stopped working within this tax period, enter the date that the employee stopped working using the same date format as above. If the employee did not stop working within the tax period, and is still employed, leave this column blank.
Birth Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of birth of the employee.  This  must  be  entered  in  the  format

dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Basic Salary - Enter the basic salary of the employee in Rwandan francs during the tax period.
Benefit in Kind Transport - If the employee benefits from access to and use of a motor vehicle provided by the employer during the tax period, enter 10% of the taxable income in FRW, excluding other benefits in kind.
Benefit in Kind House - If the employee benefits from accommodation provided by the employer during the tax period, enter 20% of the taxable income in FRW, excluding other benefits in kind.
Benefit in Kind Others - If the employee benefits from any benefits in kind from the employer other than transport or accommodation during the tax period, these are entered at market value in FRW.
Cash Allowance Transport - If the employee benefited from a cash allowance for transport from the employer during the tax period, enter the allowance amount.
Cash Allowance House - If the employee benefited from a cash allowance for accommodation from the employer during the tax period, enter the allowance amount.
Cash Allowance Others - If the employee benefited from a cash allowance for purposes other than transport or

accommodation from the employer during the tax period, enter allowance amount.
Only the columns up to 'Cash Allowance Others' need to be entered. The remaining twelve columns are calculated automatically when validating.
PAYE Casual Employees Tab
This tab is applicable for any employer of casual employees. The 'PAYE Casual Employees' tab is very similar to the 'PAYE Permanent Employees' tab except that it refers to casual employees. The 'Job Type' column should enter 'C' for casual employees.
There is also no specific columns for 'Basic Salary', 'Benefits in Kind...' or 'Cash Allowances...'. Instead, enter all taxable income within 'Casual Employees Income'. 'PAYE Taxable Base' should equal 'Casual Employees Income'. There are no columns for RAMA contributions.
Only the columns up to 'PAYE Taxable Base' need to be entered. The remaining twelve columns are calculated automatically when validating.
PAYE Second Employer Tab
This tab is applicable for any second or additional employers who are not the main employer of a particular employee. The 'PAYE Second Employer' tab is very similar to the 'PAYE Permanent Employees' tab except that it refers to employees who have a different main employer.

Only the columns up to 'Cash Allowance Others' need to be entered. The remaining twelve columns are automatically calculated when validating.
Once all the PAYE annexures have been completed and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the declaration.
Unified PAYE Declaration
Once all the Unified PAYE annexures have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the Unified PAYE declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration.
Note however, that unlike other tax types, the Unified PAYE declaration is selected from 'Unified Declaration' instead of 'Tax Declaration' on the left hand side of the E-Tax Homepage, as shown below.

The Unified PAYE declaration form requires similar data to the Unified PAYE Annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the Unified PAYE declaration form, the total combined values for all employees during that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.



After saving the declaration form, upload the annexures and then compare with the declaration form. See page

87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.


Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, the screen below will load. Note that there is more than one acknowledgment receipt. Each acknowledgement receipt has a different RRA Reference Number and must be paid separately.

Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

PAYE and RSSB Contributions Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for PAYE are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
What are the penalties for not declaring or paying RSSB contributions?
An RSSB registered taxpayer who pays RSSB contributions after the deadline is charged 3% interest on a monthly basis. This penalty is the same whether the taxpayer has submitted the RSSB declaration or not.
As RSSB Contributions are required to be paid on behalf of employees, employers that do not pay the contributions on time may be subject to a procedure of forced recovery in conformity with the law.
For more details on RSSB penalties, see the RSSB website at: http://www.rssb.rw/content/declarations.

Value Added Tax (VAT)
Explanation of VAT
What is VAT?
VAT is a tax on the consumption of goods and services. It is indirectly paid by the final consumer of the goods or service. However, it is paid on their behalf by taxpayers on the value added at each stage of production.
VAT is applied to as wide a range of products as possible to ensure fairness across business sectors. However, there are some goods and services that are exempt or zero-rated for VAT. This is usually because tax on these goods and services may be unfairly burdensome on the poor or because those goods and services have benefits to efficiency across the rest of the economy.
VAT registered taxpayers are required to have at least one Electronic Invoicing Sytem (EIS), such as an EBM, each of their sales locations, and use these to provide EIS invoices for all sales transactions, see page 212 for details on EISs.
Who must register for VAT?
A taxpayer must register for VAT if their turnover is above FRW 20,000,000 for any twelve-month period, or above FRW 5,000,000 for three consecutive quarters. This includes all taxable, exempt and zero-rated sales.

In addition, any taxpayer may choose to register for VAT. What are the obligations of VAT registered taxpayers? VAT registered taxpayers must:
- Display clearly the VAT registration certificate in plain view at the place of business, see page 50 for how to obtain a VAT certificate.
- Use an Electronic Invoicing Sytem (EIS), a type of EBMto issue VAT invoices.
- Issue an EBM invoice to all customers with every transaction.
- Submit a monthly or quarterly VAT declaration within fifteen days after the end of the tax period.
- Be available at all times to receive RRA officers and to make available books of accounts.
What is the tax rate of VAT?
The normal rate of VAT is 18%. There is also a zero-rate (0%) and exemptions applicable for certain types of goods and services, see page 193 for more details.
Who pays VAT?
VAT is indirectly paid by the final consumer of the goods or service. However, taxpayers pay on their behalf on the value added at each stage of production.
This means that taxpayers charge VAT on their sales, output VAT, whilst claiming back VAT paid on their

inputs, input VAT. The amount each taxpayer pays is therefore equal to output VAT minus input VAT.










What do VAT inclusive and VAT exclusive prices mean?
The VAT inclusive price means the price of the goods or service including VAT. The VAT exclusive price means the price of the goods or service that is not the final cost, to which VAT has not yet been added.
Goods and services supplied by VAT registered taxpayers must always be sold at the VAT inclusive price. However, when completing the VAT declaration form, the total VAT exclusive price of all sales is entered, see page 202. The invoice supplied to the customer must show the VAT exclusive price, amount of VAT and VAT inclusive price.
To calculate the VAT inclusive or VAT exclusive price of taxable goods and services:
VAT exclusive price * 1.18 = VAT inclusive price. VAT inclusive price / 1.18 = VAT exclusive price. Which goods and services are taxable for VAT?
All goods and services supplied in Rwanda are considered taxable unless they are zero-rated or exempt.
Services are considered to be supplied in Rwanda if the services provider:
- Has their headquarters in Rwanda.
- Is usually resident in Rwanda.
- Or if the recipient of the services benefits from it within Rwanda, for further details see the VAT Reverse Charge section on page 196.

Which goods and services are zero-rated for VAT?
Zero-rated for VAT purposes means that no output VAT is charged on the goods or services, but input VAT can still be claimed.
The list of zero-rated goods and services, detailed in Article 5 of Law N°37/2012 of 09/11/2012, includes:
- Exported goods and services
- Goods and services intended for diplomats accredited to Rwanda that are used in their diplomatic missions provided those countries give the same privileges to Rwandan diplomats
- Goods and services intended for international organisations that have signed agreements with Rwanda
- Goods and services intended for projects funded by partners that have signed agreements with the Government of Rwanda.


300,000 (VAT exclusive) to Kenya, with VAT paid on inputs of FRW 30,000.
The total (VAT exclusive) sales is therefore:
(FRW 236,000 / 1.18) + FRW 300,000 = FRW 200,000 +
FRW 300,000 = FRW 500,000.
The taxable sales exclude the exports so is FRW 200,000. The output VAT is therefore:
FRW 200,000 * 18% = FRW 36,000.
The input VAT includes the VAT paid for the taxable sales, as well as the zero-rated sales. The input VAT is therefore:
FRW 10,000 + FRW 30,000 = FRW 40,000
Therefore, Innocent's VAT due is equal to: FRW 36,000 - FRW 40,000 = FRW -4,000.
Innocent requests a VAT refund from RRA of FRW 4,000.
Which goods and services are exempt for VAT?
Exempt for VAT purposes means that no output VAT is charged on the goods or services, and no input VAT can be claimed. The list of exempt goods and services, detailed in Article 6 of Law N°37/2012 of 09/11/2012, includes:
- Goods and services related to health purposes
- Educational materials and services
- Books, newspapers and magazines
- Transportation services

- Financial and insurance services
- Energy supply equipment
- Unprocessed agricultural and livestock products
- Locally processed milk
- Industrial machinery
- Mobile telephones and SIM cards.
If it is not possible to distinguish whether the VAT paid on inputs directly, or indirectly, contributed to taxable sales or exempted sales, then the allowable input VAT can be equal to the ratio of taxable (or zero-rated) sales to total sales multiplied by the total input VAT.




Can taxpayers that only sell exempt or zero-rated goods and services be exempted from VAT registration?
Taxpayers exclusively making exempt or zero-rated sales may write to the Commissioner General of RRA requesting exemption from the requirement to register for VAT. This letter should:
- Identify the taxpayer's name and TIN.
- State the request to be exempted from the requirement to register for VAT.
- Contain all supporting documents proving the taxpayer does not make any taxable sales.
This exemption from the requirement to register for VAT is only valid when confirmed in writing by the Commissioner General and may be rescinded, also in a letter from the Commissioner General, at any time.
However, taxpayers making zero-rated sales who intend to claim input tax credits must register for VAT to do so.
What is VAT Reverse Charge?

If a local taxpayer is the recipient of services from a foreign supplier, the local taxpayer is required to pay the VAT on this service. The local taxpayer must declare and pay 18% of the value of the services received.
This VAT may be offset as an input tax only if the services recieved are not available in the local market. Services are considered not to be available in Rwanda if there is no one who can deliver identical or similar services on the local market.
If the services are available on the local market, then the VAT may not be offset as an input tax. This is to encourage taxpayers to work with domestic businesses.
What is VAT Retained by Public Institutions?
Government and public institutions must withhold 18% VAT on all taxable supplies within public tenders. The taxpayer who has won the tender is required to declare the taxable supplies as output VAT, but can offset the VAT Retained by Public Institutions. The VAT is paid by the public institution on behalf of the taxpayer.
The taxpayer must keep proof that this VAT was withheld. The public institution must pay the VAT to RRA by the fifteenth day of the following month, from the date of the invoice, as with regular VAT payments.
What is a VAT refund?

It is possible for the final VAT due of a taxpayer to be negative. In this case, the taxpayer is due a VAT refund. There is no further action required of the taxpayer.
An example of what this may look like on the tax declaration is shown below.

If the VAT refund claimed is a small amount relative to the size of the business, as decided by RRA, this will be carried forward and will automatically be used to offset against future VAT payments. This is determined by the scale    of    the    business    as    below:

* Small taxpayer carries forward up to FRW 500,000
* Medium taxpayers carries forward up to FRW 2,000,000
* Large taxpayer carries forward up to FRW 5,000,000


If the VAT refund claimed is a larger than these thresholds RRA will audit the refund and may contact the taxpayer for further evidence. If the refund is correct and accurate, RRA will contact the taxpayer and provide a bank cheque for the refund amount.

When is the deadline to declare and pay VAT?
VAT is declared and paid on a monthly basis. Alternatively, taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 200,000,000 may request to declare on a quarterly basis.
Whether monthly or quarterly, the VAT declaration must be submitted and paid by the 15th of the month following the end of the tax period.
This means that monthly declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 31st must be declared to RRA and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared to RRA and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.
The quarters for taxpayers declaring VAT on a quarterly basis concern the tax period between:
- March 1st to May 31st must be declared and paid by 15th June.
- June 1st to August 31st must be declared and paid by 15th September.
- September 1st to November 30th must be declared and paid by 15th December.
- December 1st to February 28th (or 29th if a leap year), must be declared and paid by 15th March.

What is a VAT Refund for Privileged Persons?
VAT Refund for 'privileged persons' refers to the refund available to certain consumers on the VAT paid on their goods or services. Where 'privileged persons' refers to:
- diplomats or individuals on diplomatic missions.
- non-governmental organisations (NGOs), inter- governmental organisations (IGOs) or donor- funded projects.
Privileged persons claim refunds online using the E-tax system.

Declaring VAT
The declaration process for VAT is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Annexures
Firstly, download the VAT Annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more details on downloading annexures.
The VAT Annexure file has five tabs. Only the tabs that are applicable in that tax period need to be completed, validated and saved. See page 79 if the taxpayer has any problems when validating annexures.
Sales Tab
This tab is applicable for taxpayer who has made sales during the tax period. These must be entered regardless of whether the sales were taxable, exempt, zero-rated or exported.
This sales data can be entered manually, or can be copied from the Electronic Invoicing Sytem (EIS), a type of EBMBack Office and pasted into the Sales tab. For more information on copying sales data from the EBM Back Office, see the EISsection on page 217.
The 'Sales' tab has 11 columns. Each row is for a separate transaction. For each transaction, enter details on:

Buyer TIN - For sales to other businesses, enter the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) of the buyer. For sales to final consumers, this can be left empty, where the system will convert it to '999999999' (nine '9's).
Buyer Name - As above, for sales to other businesses, enter the name of the buyer. For sales to final consumers, this can be left empty.
Nature of Goods - Enter a brief description of the goods or services that have been sold.
Invoice Number - Enter the unique invoice number of the transaction.
Invoice Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the transaction in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Total Amount of Sales (VAT Exclusive) - Enter the value of the transaction, excluding VAT.
Exempted Sales Amount - Enter the value of sales of goods or services that were exempt from VAT.
Zero Rated Sales Amount - Enter the value of sales of goods or services that were zero-rated for VAT purposes. Although exports are also zero-rated, do not include these in this column, instead enter exports in the 'Exports Amount column'.

Exports Amount - Enter the value of sales of goods or services that were exported and sold outside Rwanda and therefore zero-rated for VAT purposes.
Taxable Sales - Enter the total value of taxable sales. This is equal to 'Total Amount of Sales (VAT Exclusive)' minus ('Exempted Sales Amount' + 'Zero Rated Sales Amount' + 'Exports Amount').
VAT - Enter the total output VAT. This is equal to 'Taxable Sales' * 18%.
Purchases Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has purchased inputs from within Rwanda during the tax period for use in their goods and services sold.
The 'Purchases' tab is very similar to the 'Sales' tab except that it refers to the locally purchased inputs that have gone into the goods and services listed in 'Sales'.
Fill in the details in the same manner as before, except that it is now the Supplier TIN and Supplier Name that is required. In addition, there is no longer differentiation for exempt, zero-rated or exports, just the 'Amount without VAT' and the 'VAT' paid on local purchases.
VAT Importation Tab
This tab is applicable for any taxpayer who has imported inputs during the tax period for use in their goods and

services sold. This tab uses information from the customs declaration of the imported inputs.
The 'VAT Importation' tab has 7 columns. Each row is for a separate import transaction. For each transaction, enter details on:
Customs Station - Enter the border post where the goods or services were imported. This is listed under the 'Office of Destination' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Customs Declaration (DD COM) Number - Enter the unique customs declaration number, for example: 'C39012'. This is listed under the 'Customs Reference' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Customs Declaration Date - Enter the date of the importation, which must be entered in the format of DD/MM/YYYY such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted. This is listed next to the 'Customs Reference' in the top right of the customs declaration.
Nature of Goods - Enter a brief description of the goods that have been imported. This is listed in the 'Packages and descriptions of goods' section in the middle of the customs declaration.
Origin - Enter the name of the country where the goods or services first come from. This means that if a product first comes from the United Kingdom but arrives via boat

to Kenya and lorry through Uganda to the Gatuna border, the origin country is United Kingdom. This is listed under the 'Country of Origin' or 'Cty. orig. Code' in the middle of the customs declaration.
Customs Value (CIF) - Enter the value of the goods or services upon entering Rwanda in Rwandan Francs. CIF stands for Cost, Insurance and Freight which means that this value includes the cost of the goods and services from when they originated, but also includes the costs of insurance and freight or transport in getting the goods to Rwanda. The value in FRW is under the 'Statistical Value' in the middle right of the customs declaration.
VAT Paid - Enter the VAT paid on the imports. This is equal to the 'V02' Amount in the 'Calculation of Taxes' section in the middle of the customs declaration.
Deductible VAT Reverse Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has received services from foreign suppliers during the tax period. This tab must be completed only if the services are not available in the local market.
The 'Deductible VAT Reverse' tab has 6 columns. Each row is for a separate transaction. For each transaction, enter details on:
Suppliers Name - Enter the name of the foreign supplier who provided the services. Note: the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) is not required as VAT

Reverse Charge is only required from taxpayers who received services from non-resident suppliers who are not registered in Rwanda.
Nature of Services Supplied - Described above. Invoice Number - Described above.
Invoice Date (dd/mm/yyyy) - Described above.
Total Invoice Amount - Enter the total amount paid for the services to the foreign supplier, excluding VAT.
VAT Reverse Charge Amount - Enter the VAT to be paid by the taxpayer. If all services are taxable, this is equal to 'Total Invoice Amount' * 18%.
VAT Retained Tab
This tab is applicable to any taxpayer who has sold goods or services to public institutions and had the VAT withheld and paid on their behalf by the public institution.
The 'VAT Retained' tab has 8 columns. Each row is for a separate import transaction. For each transaction, enter details on:
Public Institution's TIN - Enter the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) of the public institution to which the goods or service were sold.
Public Institution's Name - Enter the name of the public institution to which the goods or service were sold.

Nature of Goods or Services - Described above. Invoice Number - Described above.
Date of Invoice - Described above.
Date Delivered - Enter the date the goods or services were delivered or completed, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Invoice (VAT Exclusive) - Enter the amount of the invoice, excluding VAT.
Withheld Amount (18%) - Enter the amount of VAT that was withheld and paid on the taxpayers' behalf by the public institution, typically Invoice (VAT Exclusive) * 18%.
VAT Declaration
After all the applicable annexures have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration.
The declaration form requires similar data to the annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the declaration form, the total combined values for all transactions during that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes

have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.

After saving the declaration form, upload the annexures and then compare with the declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.





Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

VAT Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for VAT are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97. For penalties directly relating to EBMs, see page 228.
What are the penalties for a taxpayer who is not registered for VAT, but is required to be?
A taxpayer who is not registered for VAT but is required to be registered for VAT is subject to a penalty of:
- Fifty percent (50%) of the amount of value added tax output for the entire period of operation without value added tax output, where Value Added Tax registration is required
- An administrative fine of one hundred (100%) of the tax indicated on any invoice issued by a retailer not registered for VAT

Electronic Invoicing System (EIS)
Explanation of Electronic Invoicing System
What is the Electronic Invoicing System?
The Electronic Invoicing System (EIS) formerly known as EBM (Electronic Billing Machine) refers to various methods of printing RRA certified invoices and sending sales data to RRA in real-time. EIS is not a type of tax, but helps to improve bookkeeping and Value Added Tax (VAT) collection. EIS invoices are required to be provided to buyers for every sales transaction by every registered taxpayer.
EIS will be used to refer to electronic billing machines (EBMs) as well as software used to print RRA certified invoices (such as VSDC). There are two versions of EBMs. The new EBM version 2.0 (EBM 2.0) is a form of software now available for taxpayers to install onto desktop or laptop computers, see page 227 for more details. VSDC can be incorporated with privately provided billing systems.
EISs have proven benefits to tax administration and RRA is committed to increasing and enforcing the uptake and use of EISs. EISs have also been introduced in many other countries around the world and are a key priority in RRA's

vision of becoming "a world-class efficient and modern revenue agency".
Taxpayers are encouraged to take advantage of the functionality provided in EBM 2.0. The advantages of EBM 2.0 are outlined later in this section.
The EBM 1 uses specific EBM hardware, made up of two components, a Certified Invoicing System (CIS) and a Sales Data Controller (SDC). These can be integrated into one item ('All in One EBM'), or kept separate but connected by cable.
This Tax Handbook will refer to 'EBM' if the information applies to both EBM 1 and EBM 2.0. If the information is specific to only one version, the Tax Handbook will refer to 'the EBM 1 or 'EBM 2.0' separately.
For any questions regarding EIS/EBMs, contact the EBM Division within RRA directly by calling 078818 5702.
What are the benefits of EIS/EBMs?
There are numerous benefits of EIS/EBMs, both to compliant taxpayers and to the tax administration. These benefits to the taxpayer, to RRA and to Rwanda include:
- EIS/EBM sales data can be copied and pasted into the 'Sales' tab when completing the VAT annexures, making it quicker and easier for taxpayers to declare and pay VAT, see page 217 for more details on this process.

- Improving bookkeeping and stocktaking for taxpayers through using EIS/EBMs to record the exact items and prices being sold.
- Simplifying the audit process, reducing the time and interruption of taxpayer's daily operations
- Reducing the potential for tax evasion, ensuring that taxpayers can compete fairly, and increasing the tax revenues for public spending.
Which taxpayers must have EIS/EBMs?
VAT-registered taxpayers are required to have at least one EIS/EBM at each of their sales locations.
A taxpayer must register for VAT if their turnover is above FRW 20,000,000 for any twelve-month period, or above FRW 5,000,000 for three consecutive quarters. In addition, taxpayers may also choose to register for VAT. See page 188 for more details on VAT registration.
Furthermore, taxpayers who are not required to be registered for VAT, but carry out sales transactions, are also required to issue EIS/EBM invoices.
How can taxpayers obtain EBM 2.0?
EBM 2.0 is an upgraded software version of EBM now available to all taxpayers. EBM 2.0 is available for free, however, taxpayers must have a desktop or laptop computer where EBM staff install EBM 2.0 software. EBM
2.0 is available directly from RRA Headquarters. EBM 2.0

is not available from the licensed suppliers listed on page 220 as these supply only the EBM 1.
Taxpayers requesting EBM 2.0 must submit an application form, which can be found at https://ebm2.rra.gov.rw by entering to the 'Sign Up' page.
EBM is not available for MAC computers. It can be installed on Windows OS.
What do I require to obtain EBM 2.0?
If you would like to obtain EBM 2.0, bring to RRA Headquarters:
- RDB Business Registration Certificate
- VAT Registration Certificate
- If you are the owner of the company, your National ID or Passport
- If you are not the owner of the company, the Power of Attorney and National or Passport of the Owner
Taxpayers will have EBM 2.0 installed on their machine.
In addition, the user must first be trained how to use EBM
2.0. Training takes place at RRA on Monday, Wednesday and Thursday from 8:00am to 12.30pm.
What are the advantages of EBM Version 2.0 (EBM 2.0)?
The advantages of EBM 2.0 include:

- Extracting data automatically from suppliers also with EBM 2.0 and Customs, allowing the taxpayer to also copy and paste into the 'Purchases' and 'VAT Importation' tabs when completing the VAT annexures, making it quicker and easier for taxpayers to declare and pay VAT.
- Providing the taxpayer with greater information over their own stock and supply chain.
- When an EBM 2.0 taxpayer makes a purchase with another domestic retailer and receives an EBM 2.0 invoice, this purchase will automatically be loaded to the buyer's EBM 2.0 as a purchase
- When an EBM 2.0 taxpayer declares an import at customs, using the same TIN supplied for EBM 2.0, this import will automatically be loaded to the importer's EBM 2.0 as a purchase.
- RRA provides free remote technical support for EBM 2.0. The 'Team View'/'AnyDesk' function allowing the taxpayer and RRA to work remotely together to fix any problems, without needing to visit RRA offices.
- Multiple EBM 2.0 user accounts can be created for one enterprise. These account can be created with different user access rights, as required.
- EBM 2.0 can be connected to the taxpayer's existing internet connection. If not, the taxpayer

can use a modem at the subsidised rate of FRW 3,000	per  month  for  3.2  GB,	by  dialling
*456*2*3000#.
How can taxpayers copy sales data into the VAT Sales Annexure?
One of the advantages to using EBMs is that a monthly report containing all sales is available to be accessed online, and can be copied and pasted directly into the Sales tab of the VAT annexure when declaring. This reduces the time taken to complete the VAT annexures.
To view and download the EBM monthly reports, visit: https://ebm2.rra.gov.rw/, follow the link and login to the EBM back office using the username (TIN) and password. If a taxpayer does not know their EBM back office password, they should call the RRA call centre on 3004.
Once logged in, the taxpayer can click 'VAT Annexure', select the relevant month, and click 'Excel Download'. This can then be copied and pasted into the sales tab of the VAT annexures, see page 217 for more details.
Where can I find information about EBM 2.0 usage?
A client manual on the use of EBM 2.0 is available at in the EBM section of the Domestic Tax Services page on the RRA website ( https://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=33
).

What is a Virtual Sales Data Controller (VSDC)?
A VSDC can be used to integrate local sales management systems/private billing system with the requirements of EBM 2.0.
Businesses can then continue to use their own retail management software package, while complying with the modalities of EBM requirements.
The licensed suppliers of VSDC and their contact numbers are displayed below:
Pivot Access LTD
o +250784245100
   o info@pivotaccess.com Algorithm INC LTD
o +250788880066




Step 3: Add the Customer ID, as supplied by the consumer. Customer details must be created in the Customer Management tab of EBM 2.0. This includes the TIN number of the customer. If the customer does not have a TIN, record the mobile phone number of that customer.
Step 4: Add the Item Code for the sale. Items must be created in the Item Management tab of EMB 2.0. Item records include the price, taxable value and tax rate for an item.
Step 5: Enter the item quantity in the Sales Qty field of the pictured transaction. Press 'Confirm' to add the item.
Step 6: Repeat steps 3 to 5 for each type of item/service being sold.
Step 7: Press 'Save' in order to save the receipt in your records.
Step 8: To approve the receipt and issue an invoice, double click on 'waiting' invoice. Select 'Approve' on the subsequent window.
For further information and training on EBM 2.0, please visit the RRA EBM 2.0 training centre at RRA HQ.
Where can you buy EBM 1?
There are three licensed suppliers of EBM 1 in Rwanda. These suppliers are trained to help taxpayers choose the most suitable type of EBM for their needs, and to explain

to taxpayers exactly how to set up and use their EBM, including providing step-by-step training for using the relevant type of EBM. The licensed suppliers and their contact numbers are displayed below:

- Inzonvou Technologies Limited
o +250 (0) 788 555 779
o info@inzonvoutech.com
- AA UNI Rwanda Ltd
o +250 (0) 783 116 776
o info@aaunirwanda.com
- Pergamon Group Rwanda Ltd
o +250 (0) 786 381 374
o info.rwanda@pergamongroup.com

How much do EBM 1 cost?
EBM 1s vary in price depending upon the supplier and the type of EBM configuration. RRA is working hard with suppliers to reduce the price of EBMs, which currently start from approximately FRW 252,000.
It is important to note that EBM SIM cards must also be loaded with sufficient airtime, at a rate of FRW 1,000 per month. Also note that EBMs can be entered as 'assets' in the taxpayer's balance sheets and therefore deducted as business expenses in Income Tax declarations.

After purchasing an EBM, this must be taken to RRA offices for registration and activation. The taxpayer must also inform RRA of any changes to the EBM sales location.
How is airtime loaded onto EBM 1 SIM cards?
It is the taxpayer's responsibility to ensure that their EBM is loaded with sufficient airtime. Airtime for EBM 1 is available at a subsidised rate of FRW 1,000 per month. Airtime can be uploaded months in advance by purchasing more than one FRW 1,000 vouchers. Only FRW 1,000 vouchers are allowed.
To check the airtime status of the EBM SIM card, dial:
*183*SIM Card Number#
To load airtime onto the EBM SIM card, dial:
*746*Voucher Number*SIM Card Number#

How can EBM 1 be programmed?
Once the EBM 1 is activated, taxpayers can program the full list of the products, including both goods and services, and the current prices. These prices do not have to be final and can be changed for each sale. Additional products can be added at any time.
The taxpayer can program the products themselves, or can take a spreadsheet on a USB flash or hard drive to the licensed suppliers to be uploaded all at once. This spreadsheet should take the form, for example:

Code
Item Name
Typical Price
VAT Status
1
Water 500ml
FRW 300
 Normal Rate - 18%
2
Water 1.5l
FRW 700
 Normal Rate - 18%
3
Locally Processed Milk 1l
FRW 1,200
Exempt
How do taxpayers use EBMs to provide EBM invoices?
EBMs must be used to produce EBM invoices for every sales transaction, whether to other businesses or to final consumers. The exact process varies slightly for different types of EBM. The licensed suppliers are trained to help show taxpayers how to use their EBMs.

This typical process for using original EBMs is to enter the quantity, price and code of each item that is being sold. For sales to other businesses, the taxpayer can enter the client's TIN number at the beginning of the transaction.
Once all items in a transaction have been entered, the taxpayer must print the EBM invoice and give this to the consumer. The taxpayer should also print a duplicate EBM invoice of every transaction for their records. Alternatively, at the end of the business day, the taxpayer can print a daily report of all EBM invoices.


In order to make a sale on this particular type of EBM:
Step 1: Press 'MODE' until the EBM is set to 'Registration Mode', then press 'TOTAL' to confirm the mode.
Step 2: If the client has a TIN, first enter the TIN Number and then press 'PY1'. If the client does not have a TIN or is the final consumer, ignore this step.
Step 3: Enter the number of the particular items/services being sold and then press 'QTY'.
Step 4: Enter the value of each of the particular item/service being sold and then press 'PRC'.
Step 5: Enter the item code that has been programmed for that particular product and then press 'PLU'.
Step 6: Repeat steps 3 to 5 for each type of item/service being sold, then press 'TOTAL' to print the EBM invoice.
Step 7: Press 'SH' then 'TOTAL' in order to print out a duplicate EBM invoice for your own records.
What if the taxpayer enters an EBM invoice incorrectly, or wishes to cancel, refund or discount a transaction?
If the taxpayer wishes to refund a consumer, or makes a mistake when entering a transaction, they can cancel a specific item, or the whole receipt. Alternatively, if the taxpayer wishes to enter any discount, this can be done at the end of the transaction, before printing the invoice.
What should taxpayers do if the EBM is not working?

If there is any period where the EBM is not working, for whatever reason, taxpayers must notify RRA, handwrite invoices for the consumer, and keep a duplicate, until the EBM is working again. Once the EBM is working again, enter all the hand-written invoices into the EBM.
Further actions depend upon the type of problem, explained in turn below.
What should taxpayers do if the EBM is out of airtime?
RRA sends reminder messages, but ultimately it is the taxpayer's responsibility to ensure that their EBM is loaded with sufficient airtime. See page 222 for details on how to check and load airtime onto EBM sim cards.
What should taxpayers do if there is a power cut?
EBMs are able to store a certain amount of battery charge that can power the EBM for a number of hours. Therefore, EBMs should not often fully run out of power.
What should taxpayers do if the EBM is stolen?
If an EBM is stolen, or damaged in an event considered force majeure (unforeseeable circumstances), a taxpayer must notify RRA in writing within twelve (12) hours and provide accompanying proof that the EBM was stolen.
What should taxpayers do if the EBM is broken?
If the EBM is broken, the taxpayer is required to notify RRA within six (6) hours. They should then take the EBM back to the licensed supplier for consultation and repair.

If the problem cannot be solved, a replacement EBM must be purchased by the taxpayer within eight days.
What should taxpayers do if they de-register and no longer require their EBM 1?
De-registered taxpayers who used EBM 1 for their business should bring their EBM to RRA HQ to be suspended.

EIS/EBMs Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines relating to the lack of or misuse of EIS/EBMs are explained below. These may be applied separately, or in addition to, any penalties and fines relating to Value Added Tax (VAT) explained on page 211.
What are the penalties for a taxpayer who does not have an EIS/EBM, but is required to have?
A taxpayer who does not have an EIS/EBM for a sales location that requires an EIS/EBM is subject to a penalty of:
- FRW 200,000 for a first time offence.
- FRW 400,000 for any repeat offences.

What are the penalties for a taxpayer who fails to comply with any other EIS/EBM user obligations?
A VAT taxpayer who fails to comply with any other five EIS/EBM user obligations, including indicating the true name of the goods, notify RRA of EIS/EBM failure and refraining from deleting invoices inappropriately, is subject to a penalty of:
- FRW 200,000 for a first time offence.
- FRW 400,000 for any repeat offences.
What are the penalties for a taxpayer who has an EBM but fails to issue an EIS/EBM invoice?

A VAT taxpayer who has an operational EIS/EBM but fails to issue an EIS/EBM invoice when required is subject to a penalty of:
- Ten (10) times the value of the evaded VAT for a first time offence.
- Twenty (20) times the value of the evaded VAT for any repeat offences.
A non-VAT taxpayer who has an operational EIS/EBM bit fails to issue an EIS/EBM invoice when required is subject to a penalty of:
- Twice (2) times the value of the transaction.
- Four (4) times the value of the transaction for any repeat offences.

What are the penalties for a taxpayer who has an EIS/EBM but issues an undervalued EIS/EBM invoice?
A taxpayer who has an operational EIS/EBM but issues an undervalued EIS/EBM invoice is subject to a penalty of:
- Ten (10) times the value of the evaded VAT for a first time offence.

- Twenty (20) times the value of the evaded VAT for any repeat offences.
A non-VAT taxpayer who has an operational EIS/EBM bit fails to issue an EIS/EBM invoice when required is subject to a penalty of:
- Twice (2) times the value of the transaction.
- Four (4) times the value of the transaction for any repeat offences.
What other penalties can taxpayers be subject to for non-compliance with EIS/EBM requirements?
Additional penalties available to RRA for non-compliance with EIS/EBM requirements can include:
- Closure of business activities for a period of thirty
(30) days.
- Being barred from bidding for public tenders.
- Being named in nationwide newspapers.

Excise Duty
Explanation of Excise Duty
What is Excise Duty?
Excise Duty is a tax applied to specific products. This means that it is able to discourage consumption with negative social impacts. This can reduce the costs of healthcare and policing, whilst raising significant revenues for further government spending. As Excise Duties are charged on the consumption of certain products, it is also referred to as a 'consumption tax'.
Who must register for Excise Duty?
Any manufacturer of a product that is subject to Excise Duty is required to declare and pay Excise Duty. There is no threshold on company size for Excise Duty. A taxpayer who manufactures taxable products must declare and pay Excise Duty regardless of the size of the business.
What are the obligations of taxpayers registered for Excise Duty?
The obligations of Excise Duty registered taxpayers are detailed in Section 2 of Law N° 26/2006 of 27/05/2006. Excise Duty registered taxpayers must:
- Submit an Excise Duty declaration and pay tax due within 5 days after the end of the tax period.

- Keep a register of inventory of the taxable products manufactured. The inventory register shall indicate the quantity exported, sold for domestic consumption, and destroyed, discarded or burnt, so that at any time, the quantities within the factory can be established and verified.
- Keep a register of the sales of all taxable products manufactured. The sales register shall indicate the price and quantity sold to every customer as well as the customer's name and address.
- Keep a register of raw materials to be used in manufacturing of taxable products.
- Keep a register of the activities of the manufacturer. The activities register shall indicate the date and time of starting and ending work, the type names and the nature of the equipment used, the type and quantity of the raw materials used and the batch number of production, the quantity of the goods produced.
- Notify RRA of any changes to business premises.
- Notify RRA, within ten (10) days, of any interruption to manufacturing activities
- Attach appropriate products with a tax stamp, listed later in this chapter.

Who pays Excise Duty?
Excise Duty is paid by the manufacturer of the taxable products. However, it is expected that these costs will be passed onto consumers in the form of higher prices.
What are the valuation methods of Excise Duty?
The rates of excise duties can be charged on a 'specific', 'ad valorem' or 'mixed' basis. A specific Excise Duty charges a certain amount of tax per unit of the product. For example, Excise Duty is charged on premium oil in Rwanda at a rate of FRW 183 per litre.
An ad valorem Excise Duty charges a percentage of the taxable value of the product. For example, Excise Duty is charged on beer in Rwanda at 60% of the taxable value.
A mixed Excise Duty charges both a certain amount of tax per unit and as a percentage of the taxable value of the product. For example, Excise Duty is charged on cigarettes in Rwanda at a rate of 36% of the retail price in addition to FRW 130 per pack of 20 individual cigarettes.
What are the taxable products and rates of Excise Duty?
The tax rates for Excise Duty vary depending upon the product. The taxable products and tax rates are:


Products
Tax Rate
Natural fruit juice
5%
Lemonade, soda and other non-
natural juices
39%
Industrial packed mineral water
10%
Beer	produced	with	locally sourced inputs
30%
Other beer
60%
Wine	produced	with	locally
sourced inputs
30%
Other wine
70%
Brandies, liquors and whiskey
70%
Cigarettes
36% of retail price and FRW 130 per pack of 20
cigarettes
Premium oil (excluding benzene)
FRW 183 per litre
Gas oil
FRW 150 per litre
Lubricants
37%
Vehicles with an engine capacity
of less than 1500cc
5%
Vehicles with an engine capacity
of between 1500cc and 2500cc
10%
Vehicles with an engine capacity
of more than 2500cc
15%
Powdered milk
10%
Telephone communications
10%
The taxable base for ad valorem Excise Duty on locally manufactured products is calculated according to the selling price, excluding all other taxes.
The rates of Excise Duty are the same for both domestic and imported products. For more details on the taxable value of Excise Duty on imported products, see page 364.






When is the deadline to declare and pay Excise Duty?
For the purposes of Excise Duty declaration, each month is divided into three tax periods:
- Tax Period 1 - From 1st to 10th of each month
- Tax Period 2 - From 11th to 20th of each month
- Tax Period 3 - From 21st to the end of each month
Excise Duty must be declared and paid within five days of the end of each tax period. This means it must be declared and paid by the 15th, 25th of that month and 5th of the following month.
For example, declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 10th must be declared to RRA and paid by March 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between March 11th and March 20th must be declared to RRA and paid by March 25th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between March 21st and March 31st must be declared to RRA and paid by April 5th and so on throughout the year.
What are the exemptions for Excise Duty?
The following goods are exempt from Excise Duty:
- Goods for charitable organizations
- Vehicles assembled in Rwanda

- One personal vehicles of a returning Rwandan diplomat
- One vehicle of a Rwandan refugee returning from a foreign country as which the individual has personally owned and used for at least twelve months
- Vehicles intended for the purpose of passenger (more than 14 people), goods transport, tourist transit, and those designed for the transport of disabled people
- Products which are specifically manufactured for export
- Products which are sold to duty free shops

Should Excise Duty be paid on exports?
Taxable products are exempt from Excise Duty if they are exported outside Rwanda. However, proof is required that the products were actually exported.
In terms of the declaration, exports are included in the 'Tax Due' calculation but then refunded in the 'Tax Payable' calculation. This is an implied refund, on the presumption that proof of export will be provided.
What are tax stamps?
A tax stamp is a sign affixed on a product subject to Excise Duty to show retailers and consumers that tax has been paid. The products requiring tax stamps are cigarettes (each pack of 20 cigarettes), wines and liquors (each bottle). Tax stamps can be purchased (at cost price) from RRA. Call 078818 5571 for details on purchasing tax stamps.

Declaring Excise Duty
The declaration process for Excise Duty is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Annexures
Firstly, download the Excise Duty Annexures from the E- Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures. The Excise Annexure file has two tabs.
Raw Materials Tab
This tab is applicable for all taxpayers to record their register of raw materials used in the manufacturing of taxable products during the tax period.
Each raw material used for production of each product on each date is required to have its own row in the annex. For example, if two raw materials are used to produce two separate products on eight days of production, then (2 * 2 * 8 = 32) 32 rows are required in the annexure.
Product Name - Enter the type or brand of product that is being produced. This does not have to specify amounts or unit sizes.
Production Date - Enter the date of production, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.

Raw Materials Used - Enter the name or description of the raw material used in the production.
Opening Stock - Enter the opening stock (in given units) of the raw material at the beginning of that day's production.
Note: The units that are used can be chosen by the taxpayer, i.e. grams, kilograms or tonnes, but should remain consistent for that raw material. The units that are used are not written in the annexure, only numbers.
Quantities Used for Production - Enter the amount of stock (in given units) of the raw material during that day's production.
Quantities Spoiled - Enter the amount of stock (in given units) of the raw material that was spoiled during that day's production.
Closing Stock - Enter the amount of stock (in given units) of the raw material remaining at the end of that day's production. This should equal Opening Stock - Quantities Used for Production - Quantities Spoiled.
Excise Tab
This tab is applicable for all taxpayers to record their sales of taxable products sold during the tax period.
Each product type sold on each date for each specific unit price is required to have its own row in the annex. For example, if two different sized products of the same

brand are sold on the same day, these are required to have two separate rows.
Product name - Enter the name or brand of product that is being produced. Unlike the 'Raw Materials' tab, this should specify the amounts or unit sizes.
Production Date - Enter the date of sale (not production), which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Factory Units - Enter the number of units of each product that were sold and left the factory that day.
Note: The units that are used can be chosen by the taxpayer, i.e. individual items or multipacks, but should remain consistent.
Adjustment - Enter the number of units that have previously been sold and left the factory that have since been refunded and returned, or any other valid adjustments (proof required).
Exports - Enter the number of units that are sold with the express purpose of being exported outside Rwanda.
Total Taxable Units - Is equal to 'Factory Units' minus 'Adjustment'.
Unit Price - Enter the selling price (excluding tax) of each unit.

Total Taxable Value - Enter the total selling price (excluding tax) of all units sold, including exports. This should equal 'Total Taxable Units' multiplied by 'Unit Price'.
Tax Due - Enter the total tax due of all units sold (including exports). This should equal Total Taxable Value multiplied by the excise tax rate for that product.
Tax Refunded on Exports - Enter the tax that is not required from the units that are exported. This should equal 'Exports' multiplied by 'Unit Price' multiplied by the excise tax rate for that product.
Tax Payable - Enter the tax that is required to be paid. This should equal to 'Tax Due' minus 'Tax Refunded on Exports'.
Quantities of Products Exported - This column uses different units to the rest of the annexure. Enter the number of units that are sold with the strict purpose of being exported. This is required to be in litres (for all liquids) or individual cigarettes. Leave this cell empty in the case of airtime.
Quantities for Local Consumption - This column uses different units to the rest of the annexure. Enter the number of units that are sold with the purpose of being consumed within Rwanda. This is required to be in litres (for all liquids) or individual cigarettes. Leave this cell empty in the case of airtime.

Products Remaining in Stock - Enter the number of units that are not yet sold and remain in the factory.
Excise Declaration
Once all the Excise Duty annexures have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the Excise Duty declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration.
The Excise Duty declaration requires similar data to the Excise Duty Annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the Excise Duty declaration, the total combined values for all transactions during that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.



After saving the Excise Duty declaration form, upload the Excise Duty annexures and then compare with the Excise Duty declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.






Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.


Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Excise Duty Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for Excise Duty are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
Excise Duty has an additional set of penalties and fines, which are applied for violations to the law concerning tax stamps.
What are the penalties for failing to keep a tax stamp register?
A domestic producer or importer who does not keep:
- Stamp registers, records or related documents
- Stamp reconciliation statements
is subject to an administrative fine between million Rwandan francs (FRW 1,000,000) and two million Rwandan francs (FRW 2,000,000).
What are the consequences for incorrectly applying tax stamps?
A domestic producer or importer of products who:
- Does not affix tax stamps to appropriate products

- Does not affix tax stamps incorrectly
- Affixes tax stamps to products in a manner contrary to rules set forth by the Authority
- Defaces tax stamps
- Submits an incorrect or incomplete tax stamp reconciliation statement
- Applies tax stamps to products for which they are not intended
- Sells products which are subject to excise duty without tax stamps
Is, upon conviction, subject to a fine of between one million Rwandan francs (FRW 1,000,000) and two million Rwandan francs (FRW 2,000,000) or to imprisonment for a term of six (6) months to one (1) year.

Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%)
Explanation of Withholding Taxes
Which tax types are included in this chapter?
This chapter focuses on withholding tax of 15% (WHT 15%) and withholding tax of 3% (WHT 3%). The process of declaring and paying each of these tax types are similar. The use of the phrase 'withholding taxes' in this chapter refers to WHT 15% and WHT 3%.
It is important to note that although they are also technically types of withholding tax, this chapter does not concern Withholding tax on imports of 5% (WHT 5%), Pay As You Earn (PAYE), Gaming Tax or Tax on Minerals as these are declared and paid differently. For more details on these tax types, see their respective chapters in this Tax Handbook.
Finally, withholding tax of 15% on gambling proceeds is a type of WHT 15%, but the process of declaring is more similar to that of Gaming Tax. Therefore, this particular type of WHT 15% is mentioned briefly, but is covered in more detail in the Gaming Tax chapter on page 266.
What are Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%)?
Withholding taxes are paid on transactions on particular types of income. Withholding taxes are declared and paid

by the taxpayer who is the source of the transaction, but on behalf of the recipient. The recipient is then able to claim the tax paid back in their Income Tax declarations.
Withholding taxes are very important tax types. Withholding taxes ensure compliance by withholding tax on sources of income that might otherwise be difficult to trace. This increases the fairness of the tax system.
The different types withholding taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%) concern different types of income with different tax rates, explained in turn below.
What is Withholding Tax of 15% (WHT 15%)?
WHT 15% is required to be withheld and paid on income received by non-registered businesses or registered businesses without proof of their most recent income tax declaration. It applies to the following types of income:
- Interest income
- Dividend income
- Royalty income
- Service fees
- Performance payments
- Gambling proceeds
- Payments for goods
- Public tender income
The definitions of each of these types of income are discussed in more detail on page 252.

It is important to note that there are specific circumstances where some of these transactions may be subject to reduced withholding tax rates instead of 15%. Although the tax rate might be different, these are still referred to as WHT 15% in this Tax Handbook.
What is Withholding Tax of 3% (WHT 3%)?
WHT 3% is required to be withheld and paid by public institutions on payments to the winners of public tenders who are registered and have proof of their recent income tax declaration.
What is a Quitus Fiscal certificate?
A Quitus Fiscal certificate is available, upon request, to taxpayers who have demonstrated a history of correct tax compliance. The benefit of Quitus Fiscal is that certified taxpayers are not required to have WHT 3% withheld and paid on their behalf.
The procedure and requirements for applying for a Quitus Fiscal certificate are listed in more detail on page 49.
Who must register for Withholding Taxes?
Any taxpayer making payments of taxable income, of the types listed for each specific tax type above, must register for the relevant withholding taxes.

How are Withholding Taxes calculated?
Withholding taxes are required to be calculated before transmitting transactions of taxable income. The net amount of income that is actually transmitted is therefore equal to:
Net Amount = Taxable Income - Tax Due Where 'Tax Due' is equal to:
Tax Due = Taxable Income * Tax Rate
Note that the taxable income excludes any other taxes due on the transaction, such as Value Added Tax (VAT).
What is 'interest income'?
Interest income is subject to withholding tax of 15%. Interest income includes income from loans, deposits, guarantees, current accounts, government securities, bonds and negotiable securities. It excludes interest income on deposits held for at least one year.
However, interest income on securities listed on capital markets and interest arising from investments in listed bonds with a maturity of three years and above can be withheld from Rwandan or EAC citizen registered taxpayers at the rate of 5%.



What is 'dividend income'?
Dividend income is subject to withholding tax of 15%. Dividend income includes any income from shares and similar income distributed by companies.
However, dividend income can be withheld from registered Rwandan or EAC citizen registered taxpayers at the rate of 10%.



What is 'royalty income'?
Royalty income is subject to withholding tax of 15%. Royalty income includes all payments of any kind received for the use of, or the right to use:
- any copyright of literary, craftsmanship or scientific work including films, TV and radio broadcasting.
- any trademark, design or model, computer application, plan, formula or process.
- industrial, commercial or scientific equipment or for any information or experience of an industrial, commercial or scientific nature.
- natural resource payments.

What are 'service fees'?
Service fees are subject to withholding tax of 15%. Service fees includes payments of any kind to any person other than to an employee, in consideration for any service of a managerial, technical or consultancy nature.
Managerial services involve activities related to scoping or improving how a business is run, as opposed to the actual day-to-day activities involved in running the business.
Technical services involve activities where skills or knowledge related to a technical field are required for the provision of goods and services.
Consultancy services involve the provision of advice by experts, professionals or consultants in particular fields, typically of a short term nature of less than one year. This can overlap with managerial and technical services as these can also be provided by a consultant.
Lastly, allowances paid as compensation for sitting on the Board of Directors attract 30% withholding tax.
The rates of withholding tax on service fees can be affected by Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) signed with other countries.



What are 'performance payments'?
Performance payments are subject to withholding tax of 15%. Performance payments includes payments of any kind made to an artist, musician or sportsperson for a performance in Rwanda. This is irrespective of whether the payments are made directly or through an entity that is not resident in Rwanda.
What are 'payments for goods and services supplied by non-registered taxpayers'?
Payments of any kind for any goods and services supplied by non-registered taxpayers are subject to withholding

tax of 15%. 'Non-registered taxpayers' refers to any individual or business without a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). This includes payments made for goods and services supplied by companies or individuals outside Rwanda that are not registered with RRA.
What are 'gambling proceeds'?
Gambling proceeds won by the player during gaming activities are subject to withholding tax of 15%. Gambling proceeds are defined as the difference between the winnings of a player and the amount of money invested by the player from the start until the end of the game.
The declaration process for Withholding Tax of 15% on gambling proceeds is similar to Gaming Tax. Therefore, this is covered in the Gaming Taxes chapter on page 266.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Withholding Taxes?
Withholding taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%) are each declared and paid on a monthly basis. The declaration must be submitted and any tax paid within fifteen (15) days of the end of the tax period in which the payment was made. A separate declaration is required for each type of withholding tax (including the different types of income subject to Withholding 15%). Declarations are not required if no taxable payments were made during the tax period.

This means that declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 31st must be declared to RRA and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared to RRA and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.
Can Withholding Taxes be claimed back in Income Tax?
Taxpayers may claim back Withholding taxes that have been withheld and paid on their behalf in Income Tax declarations, see page 114 for more details.

Declaring Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%)
The declaration process for withholding taxes is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Annexures
Firstly, download the Withholding Annexures from the E- Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures.
It is important to note that each type of withholding tax (including the different types of income subject to Withholding 15%) must complete their own annexure and declaration separately. The whole declaration process should be completed for each type of withholding tax before beginning the next type.
The Withholding Annexure file has three tabs. Only the 'Withholdings' Tab needs to be completed, validated and saved for withholding taxes, the other tabs are for Gaming Taxes, see page 266 for more details on Gaming Taxes. See page 79 if the taxpayer has any problems when validating annexures.
Withholdings Tab
This tab is applicable for any taxpayer who has withheld tax of 15% (except on gambling proceeds) or 3%.

The 'Withholdings' tab has 11 columns. Each row is for a separate transaction where tax has been withheld. For each transaction, enter details on:
Withholdee's TIN - Enter the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) of the taxpayer receiving the income, from whom tax is being withheld and paid on their behalf. If they do not have a TIN, enter '999999999' (nine '9's).
Withholdee's Name - Enter the name of the taxpayer receiving the income, from whom tax is being withheld and paid on their behalf.
Invoice/Transaction Number - Enter the unique invoice number of the transaction.
Date of Withholding (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the transaction, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Nature of Goods/Services - Enter a brief description of the goods or services for which income is being withheld.
Amount on which to Withhold - Enter the total amount of income which is subject to withholding tax, excluding other taxes.
Rate Used - Enter the rate of tax withheld, without the percentage symbol. For example, withholding tax of 3% should be entered as '3'.

Amount - Enter the amount of tax withheld. This should equal 'Amount on Which to Withhold' multiplied by 'Rate Used'%.
Withholding Taxes declaration
Once the relevant annexures have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration.
However, as previously mentioned it is important to note that each type of withholding tax, including the different types of income subject to withholding 15%, must be declared separately.
In addition, it is important to select the correct type of withholding tax, with the different types of income subject to WHT 15% listed as 'WOP - INTEREST', 'WOP - DIVIDEND' and so on. Withholding tax of 15% on payments for goods and services supplied by non- registered taxpayers is listed as 'WOP - SERVICES'. Finally, WHT 3% is listed as 'WOP - PUBLIC SUPPLIES'. WOP refers to 'Withholding On Payments'.
The withholding taxes declaration forms require similar data to the annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the withholding taxes declaration forms, the total combined values for all transactions for the withholding type during

that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.

After saving the declaration form, upload the annexures and then compare with the declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declarations.



Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required

for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%) Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for withholding taxes are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
Note that taxpayers do not have to submit withholding declarations for tax periods without taxable payments.
Who must pay withholding taxes penalties and fines?
Any penalties and fines are the liability of the 'withholding agent', where the withholding agent is defined as the source of the taxable income who is required to declare and pay the withholding tax.
What if the withholding agent fails to withhold tax?
A withholding agent who fails to withhold tax at the point of transaction, is still liable to declare and pay the withholding tax, including any penalties and fines.
However, the withholding agent is entitled to recover the principal amount from the recipient of the income.

Gaming Taxes
Explanation of Gaming Taxes
What are Gaming Taxes?
Gaming taxes includes Gaming Tax and Withholding Tax of 15% on Gambling Proceeds, also referred to as Withholding On Payments (WOP) on Gaming or 'WOP- Gaming'. These taxes are applied on the proceeds of gambling activities and can therefore help to reduce the negative social impacts associated with gambling.
What are the differences between Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming?
These tax types are both types of withholding taxes. In both cases, they are withheld and paid by the betting company, referred to as the taxpayer. However, Gaming Tax is paid by the taxpayer on their income from gaming activities, whilst WOP-Gaming is withheld on behalf of the player on the player's gambling proceeds. In each case, the taxpayer or player who is withheld from is then able to claim the tax paid back in income declarations.
There is also a difference in the rates and thresholds of Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming, see page 267 for details.
Who must register for Gaming Taxes?
Any operator of gaming activities is required to register for both Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming.

Gaming activities refers to any game played with cards, dices, tickets, equipment or any machine where the result depends upon the skill of the player or operator, the element of chance, or both, and is played for money or any representative of value.
What are 'gambling proceeds'?
Gambling proceeds are defined as the difference between the winnings of a player and the amount of money invested by the player from the start until the end of the game.
If this amount is negative, i.e. the taxpayer received more money than they paid out, then the gambling proceeds are subject to Gaming Tax.
If this amount is positive, i.e. the player received more money than they paid out, then the gambling proceeds are subject to WOP-Gaming.
What is the rate of Gaming Tax?
All gambling proceeds to the taxpayer are subject to Gaming Tax of 13%.



What is the rate of WOP-Gaming?
Gambling proceeds to the player of more than FRW 30,000 are also subject to WOP-Gaming of 15%. It is important to note that this is not marginal, this means that all the gambling proceeds are taxed at 15%.




When is the deadline to declare and pay Gaming Taxes?
Both Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming are declared and paid on a monthly basis. The declaration must be submitted and any tax paid within fifteen (15) days of the end of the tax period in which the payment was made.
This means that declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 31st must be declared to RRA and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared to RRA and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.

Declaring Gaming Taxes
Gaming Tax and Withholding Tax of 15% on Gambling Proceeds (WOP-Gaming) must each be declared separately, but in a similar manner.
The declaration process for gaming taxes is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Annexures
Firstly, for both types of gaming taxes, download the Withholding Annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures.
However, it is important to note that both Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming must complete their own annexure and declaration separately.
Withholding on Gaming 13% Tab
This tab refers to the Gaming Tax and is applicable to any transaction or game where the gambling proceeds are negative, i.e. where the betting company wins.
The 'Withholding on Gaming 13%' tab has 9 columns. Each row is for a separate transaction or game for which tax has been paid. For each transaction, enter details on:
Withholdee's Name - Enter the name of the player who lost the money.

Betting Number by Withholdees - Enter the number of individual bets made during the course of the game.
Transaction Number - Enter the unique invoice number of the transaction.
Date of Withholding (dd/mm/yyyy) - Enter the date of the transaction, which must be entered in the format of dd/mm/yyyy such that 10th April 2017 is entered as 10/04/2017. Any other date format will not be accepted.
Nature of Bet - Enter a brief description of the type of bet, eg. 'Casino', 'Slots', or 'Sports Betting'.
Total Output - Enter the total amount won by the betting company.
Total Input - Enter the total amount wagered by the betting company.
Difference Subjected to Tax - Enter the gambling proceeds as defined on page 257. This should equal 'Total Output minus 'Total Input'.
Rate Used - Enter the rate of tax that is withheld. This should always be entered on '13' without including the percentage symbol.
Tax Due - Enter the amount of tax that was withheld. This should equal 'Difference Subjected to Tax' multiplied the 'Rate Used'%.

Withholding on Gaming 15% Tab
This tab refers to the WOP-Gaming and is applicable to any taxpayer who has paid out gambling proceeds to the player of more than FRW 30,000 in a transaction or game.
The 'Withholding on Gaming 15%' tab is very similar to the 'Withholding on Gaming 13%' tab discussed above, with the exception of:
Total Payment Received - Enter the total winnings of the player.
Total Amount Betted - Enter the total amount wagered by the player.
Rate Used - Enter the rate of Withholding Tax. This should always be entered as '15' without including the percentage symbol.
Tax Due - Enter the amount of tax that was withheld. This should equal ('Total Payment Received' minus 'Total Amount Betted') multiplied 'Rate Used'%.
Gaming Taxes declaration
Once both the relevant annexures have been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the declarations, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declarations.

The withholding taxes or gaming tax declaration forms require similar data to the annexures that have previously been completed. The important distinction is that in the withholding taxes or gaming tax declaration forms, the total combined values for all transactions during that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.

After saving the declaration form, upload the annexures and then compare with the declaration form, see page
87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declarations.



Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required

for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.
After submitting the Gaming Tax declaration and viewing the acknowledgement receipt, repeat the above process for WOP-Gaming.





Gaming Taxes Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for gaming taxes are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
The additional penalties and fines applicable to Gaming Taxes are the same as those concerning other types of withholding taxes, see page 92 for more details.
It is important to note that these penalties apply separately to both Gaming Tax and Withholding Tax of 15% on Gambling Proceeds. Failure to declare or pay any one tax type will result in penalties and fines applying to only that particular tax type. Failure to declare or pay both tax types will result in penalties and fines applying to both tax types.

Tax on Minerals
Explanation of Tax on Minerals
What is Tax on Minerals?
Tax on Minerals, also known as Mining Royalties or Mining Tax, is a tax on the export of minerals. Tax on Minerals ensures that all Rwandans share in the benefits from the country's natural resources when these are taken out of Rwanda.
Tax on Minerals is a type of withholding tax and can be claimed back in Income Tax declarations.
Who must register for Tax on Minerals?
Any taxpayer who exports minerals must register for Tax on Minerals. The definition of minerals includes any kinds of base or precious metals, including diamonds, gemstones and gold.
It is important to note that all mining companies operating in Rwanda are required to have valid issued by Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB).
What if the minerals are not exported?
A taxpayer who sells minerals domestically within Rwanda does not have to pay Tax on Minerals, but must declare and pay Income Tax (CIT or PIT) on these sales as normal, see page 99 for more details on Income Tax.

What are the different types of minerals?
For the purposes of Tax on Minerals, RRA considers three different types of minerals:
- base metals
- precious metals of gold category
- precious stones of diamond category
Base metals includes metals that oxidise or corrode easily when exposed to air or moisture.
Precious metals of gold category include rare naturally occurring metallic chemical elements of high value.
Precious stones of diamond category include gemstones, diamonds and other minerals of that nature.
What is the valuation method of Tax on Minerals?
There are two types of valuation method for Tax on Minerals: norm value and gross value.
Base metals and precious metals of gold category are required to use the norm value. Norm value uses the monthly average cash price per measuring unit of the London Metal Exchange, Metal Bulletin or other internationally recognised exchange market approved by MINICOM.
Precious stones of diamond category are required to use the gross value. Gross Value is equivalent to market value and means the estimated amount for which a certain

mineral would be exchanged competitively between a buyer and a seller in an arm's length transaction.
Taxpayers wishing to export precious stones of diamond category are required to obtain a trading license from the Rwanda Mines Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB).
What is the rate of Tax on Minerals?
The rates of Tax on Minerals depends upon the type of minerals:
- 4% of the norm value for base metals
- 6% of the norm value for precious metals of gold category
- 6% of the gross value for precious stones of diamond category




When is the deadline to declare and pay Tax on Minerals for base metals and precious metals of gold category?
For base metals and precious metals of gold category, tax on Minerals are declared and paid on a monthly basis. The date of the customs export declaration should be considered for the inclusion in the relevant tax period. The declaration must be submitted and any tax paid within fifteen (15) days of the end of the month.
This means that declarations concerning the tax period between March 1st and March 31st must be declared to RRA and paid by April 15th. Then declarations concerning the tax period between April 1st and April 30th must be declared to RRA and paid by May 15th and so on throughout the year.
What are the contact details for the Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board?

The Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas board is charged with implementing national policies, laws, and strategies related to mines, petroleum and gas.

Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (RMB) KN 4 Ave, Nyarugenge, Kigali, Rwanda
P.O Box 937
Tel (Local): 2930
Tel (International): +250 788 386 220 Email: info@rmb.gov.rw

Declaring Tax on Minerals
The declaration process for Tax on Minerals is similar to other domestic taxes, see the guide to Declaring Domestic Taxes using E-Tax on page 77 for more details.
Annexures
The next step requires the taxpayer to download Minerals Annexures from the E-Tax website, see page 77 for more detail on downloading annexures.
The Minerals Annexure file has one tab that must be completed, validated and saved. See page 79 if the taxpayer has any problems when validating annexures.
Mineral Tax Type Tab
The 'Minerals Tax Type' tab has 11 columns. Each row is for a separate type of mineral, and should contain all the aggregated data for that type of mineral exported during the tax period. For each type of mineral, enter details on:
Quantity Exported (in kg) - Enter the total mass of that type of mineral being exported, in kilograms
Gross Value - Enter the total gross value of the mineral being exported. This column is only required for precious stones of diamond category.
Market Value - This column is not required unless specified by MINICOM during the validation stage.

Norm Value - Enter the total norm value of the mineral being exported. This column is only required for base metals and precious metals of gold category.
Tax Due - Enter the amount of Tax on Minerals to be paid. This should equal 'Gross Value' or 'Norm Value' multiplied by the automatically completed 'Tax Rate' column, depending upon the type of mineral being exported.
Tax on Minerals Declaration
After the applicable Tax on Minerals annexure has been completed, validated and saved in the folder C:/RRA in the user's local machine, the taxpayer can return to E-Tax to complete the Tax on Minerals declaration, see page 83 for more detail on selecting the relevant declaration.
The declaration form requires similar data to the Minerals annexure that has previously been completed. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.




After saving the declaration form, upload the Minerals annexure and then compare with the declaration form, see page 87 for more detail on uploading annexures and comparing with declaration forms.




Once all the annexures and declaration values are equal, correct and certified, click to 'Submit' the declaration. After successfully submitting, this screen will load.

Click 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' to view the RRA reference number and the total tax due that are required for payment. See page 407 for more details on paying taxes. Remember that payment must also be made before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines.

Tax on Minerals Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for Tax on Minerals are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
There are no additional penalties or fines specifically applicable to Tax on Minerals.
Note that due to the nature of their industry, mining companies have been informed that penalties and fines relating to withholding tax of 15% on payments for goods and services supplied by non-registered businesses are waived. However, it is important to note that the principal amount of tax due must still be paid.

Capital Gains Tax
Explanation of Capital Gains Tax
What is Capital Gains Tax?
Capital Gains Tax applies to the profit from the sale or transfer of shares.
Capital Gains Tax ensures that shareholders pay tax on the income gained at the point of sale of these assets.
Who must register for Capital Gains Tax?
The tax on profit from the sale of shares is withheld, declared and paid by the company whose shares were sold.
What is the tax rate of Capital Gains Tax?
The tax rate of Capital Gains Tax is 5%. This is charged on the basis of the profit from the sale of shares, where profit equals sale price minus purchase price.
What are the exemptions to Capital Gains Tax?
The sale of shares on the secondary capital market, i.e. the Rwanda Stock Exchange (RSE), are exempt from Capital Gains Tax.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Capital Gains Tax?
Capital Gains tax must be declared and paid by the 15th of the month after the transaction was made.

However, as Capital Gains Tax is declared on a case by case basis, companies do not have to wait for the deadline to declare and pay. It is recommended to declare and pay Capital Gains Tax as soon as possible after making the transaction.

Declaring Capital Gains Tax
The declaration process for Capital Gains Tax is the same as for other Withholding Taxes as explained on page 259. The 'Withholdings' tab of the Withholding annexure must be completed, validated and saved as normal.
The Capital Gains declaration form is selected by choosing 'WOP - CAPITAL GAINS'. Complete the declaration form, upload the annexure and submit the declaration as normal.
In the withholding taxes declaration forms, the total combined values for all transactions for the withholding type during that tax period must be entered. Once all relevant white boxes have been entered, click 'save' to calculate the grey boxes automatically.


Capital Gains Tax Penalties and Fines
The penalties and fines for Capital Gains Tax are similar to other domestic taxes, as explained on page 92. This includes penalties and fines for:
- Late declaration
- Late payment
- Declaring less than the correct tax due
- Paying less than the tax due declared
The rules concerning interest, administrative fines and repeat offenders are also as explained on page 97.
There are no additional penalties or fines specifically applicable to Capital Gains Tax. The only difference compared to other domestic taxes is that as Capital Gains Tax is declared and paid on a case by case basis, there is no need to submit regular Capital Gains Tax declarations if no taxable capital gains have been received.

Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees
Introduction to LGT and Fees
What are Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees?
Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees are revenues collected by RRA on behalf of the District authorities. LGT ensure that landowners, landlords and business owners contribute towards the good governance and improvement of their local communities. In addition, local government fees ensure that taxpayers occupying public areas, or taxpayers requiring certain services, pay fair and consistent fees wherever they are in the country.
Combined, LGT and fees provide revenues for local government to deliver valuable community development and social protection projects.
There are three types of LGT:
- Immovable Property Tax, see page 295 for details.
- Trading License Tax, see page 307 for details.
- Rental Income Tax, see page 314 for details.
There are also a wide range of local government fees. These can be for taxpayers who conduct profit-oriented activities or who require services or authorisations from District Offices. See page 319 for details of local government fees.

The process of declaring each type of LGT and fees on the LGT system is explained on page 331.
What is the relationship between RRA and the Districts?
The mandate for collecting LGT and fees was transferred from the District authorities themselves to RRA in 2014. Within RRA, LGT and Fees are administered by the Regions and Decentralized Taxes Department. The mandate was changed because of the greater experience and capacity of RRA in collecting revenues, facilitating taxpayers and modernising processes, which means that LGT and fees can be collected more fairly and efficiently by RRA than by the Districts themselves. The collected revenues are subsequently transferred back to the Districts by RRA.
How do taxpayers declare Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees?
Taxpayers must declare Local Government Taxes and Fees using the Rwanda Automated Local Government Taxes Management System, referred to as the LGT system. This can be done online or with the help of staff at LGT tax centres or RRA offices. For more details on LGT tax centres, see page 325.
The process of declaring online is the same as the process of declaring with the help of staff at RRA offices. However, there are many advantages for taxpayers to declare online.

Some Local Government Taxes and Fees can also be declared using M-declaration - see page 347.
This Tax Handbook aims to provide all the information necessary for taxpayers to be able declare online or using M-declaration.
What are the advantages of declaring online using the LGT system or using M-declaration?
The LGT system has been designed with taxpayers in mind to make it as easy as possible to declare the required taxes and fees. The advantages of declaring online using the LGT system or using M-declaration are:
- Declare taxes anytime, from anywhere.
- Avoid travel costs of visiting RRA offices.
- Avoid queuing times at RRA offices.
How do taxpayers register and login to the LGT system?
Taxpayers must visit an RRA office to register with the LGT system. After registering, declarations of LGT and fees can be done online, or with the help of staff at RRA offices. See page 331 for more details.

Immovable Property Tax
What is the Immovable Property Tax?
Immovable Property Tax is a tax levied on the market value of a building and the surface of a plot of land. The land and buildings are referred to as the 'Immovable Property'. In order to facilitate taxpayers, the market value of the building only needs to be assessed every five years, unless major changes in the building and structures occur.
Who must register for the Immovable Property Tax?
The owner of any land and/or buildings is required to register for Immovable Property Tax. The owner of any land and/or buildings is deemed to be:
- The registered holder of the immovable property.
- The holder of the property if a title deed has not yet been registered in the name of the owner.
- A person who occupies or deals with an immovable property for at least two years if the identity of the legally recognised owner is not known.
- A proxy who represents an owner who lives outside Rwanda. It is important to note that any misrepresentation by a proxy is considered to be a misrepresentation by the owner.

- A usufructuary; a person who has the right to use and profit from a property owned by another person
If any land or properties is owned by more than one co- owner, the co-owners shall appoint and authorise one owner or any other person as a proxy to represent them collectively as a group of taxpayers.
What is the tax base of the Immovable Property Tax?
The tax base of the immovable property is the surface of a plot of land and the market value of any buildings, including improvements.
What is the taxable value of the Immovable Property?
If there is no building on a plot of land, the tax is calculated on each square metre of the whole surface of the plot of land. If there is a building on a plot of land, the tax is calculated on each square metre of the whole surface of the plot of land and the market value of the building.
How is the building being valued?
The valuation of a building and its improvements must be carried out by a certified valuer of the Institute of Real Property Valuers in Rwanda (IRPV) or by a computerised mass valuation system. The approved list of valuers is displayed on the IRPV website at: https://www.irpv.rw/ or call on +250 (0)788 788 122 / +250 783 177 760.

However, if the taxpayer presents supporting documents to the RRA, the acquisition value or the construction value of a building can be used until valuation by a certified valuer or by computerised mass valuation system is effective. The purchase price is considered to be the market value if all of the following three conditions are fulfilled:
- The immovable property was bought within the previous five years in the free market
- The property value has not changed by more than twenty percent (20%) since the acquisition
- The acquisition contract is presented to the RRA
When must the Immovable Property be valued?
The market value of each immovable property is required to be valued on the basis of a five-year cycle.
The first valuation of the immovable property is 1st January of the first taxable year. Unless significant changes to the value of the property occur, no subsequent valuations are required within the five-year assessment cycle. At the beginning of each five-year assessment cycle, the market value of the building is revised.
What happens during the five year assessment cycle?
Although valuation generally only takes place once in in the five-year assessment cycle, declaration and payment must be made every year.

This five-year cycle can be disturbed if, due to major changes in the building and structures, the value of the immovable property increases or decreases by more than 20% within an assessment cycle.
If the RRA believes that a taxpayer's self-assessment on the value of the building is undervalued, it will proceed to a counter-valuation. The value from the counter- valuation will be considered as the final market value only if the difference between the taxpayer's self- assessment and RRA's counter-valuation is more than 20%.
What are the exemptions for Immovable Property Tax?
The immovable property is exempted from declaring or paying Immovable Property Tax if it belongs to:
- Vulnerable groups (as determined by the District Council).
- State, Province, decentralized entities, public institutions (unless used for profit-making activities or leasing).
- Foreign diplomatic missions (if the country reciprocates for Rwanda's diplomatic missions only).

The land component is exempted from Immovable Property Tax if:
- The land is reserved for construction of houses in rural areas with no basic infrastructure (as defined by the District Council).
- The first 20,000 square metres of land are used for agriculture or livestock of each parcel. Note this means that for each parcel used for agriculture or livestock , the first 20,000 square metres are exempt and only any remaining land is taxable.
The following building components are exempted from Immovable Property Tax:
- One residential building, which the owner intends occupying as his or her residence (for a family). Note that the owner still needs to declare and pay the land component of the Immovable Property Tax of this residential property.
- The commonly owned portions of the building in the case of condominiums. Note that the owners of the condominium are still commonly liable to declare and pay the tax on the plots of land.




What is the tax rate on buildings?
The tax rate applied to buildings generally depends on the land usage and the tax year.
For commercial buildings, the tax rate on buildings per year is as follows:
-	0.20% in the year 2019.
-	0.30% in the year 2020.
-	0.40% in the year 2021.
- 0.50% from the year 2022 onwards.
For residential buildings, the tax rate on buildings per year is as follows:
-	0.25% in the year 2019.
-	0.50% in the year 2020.

-  0.75% in the year 2021.
- 1% from the year 2022 onwards.
- If a residential building has at least four storeys (including basement floors), the ordinary tax of each year will be reduced by 50%.
The tax rate on buildings is 0.10% per year from the year 2019 onwards for:
- Industrial buildings.
- Buildings belonging to small and medium enterprises.
- Buildings intended for activities other than residential, commercial, and industrial.




How is the land component valued?
The tax rate on the surface of plot of land is determined by the location of the land and the land use:
- FRW 0 - FRW 300 per square metre per year (set by the District Council).
- First 20,000 square metres are exempt if the land is used for agriculture or livestock activities.


Tax rate on land exceeding the standard plot size
The tax rate on land exceeding the standard parcel size is 50% higher, when intended for the construction of buildings. The standard size is determined by an order of the Minister in charge of housing.
However, the additional tax rate on land exceeding the standard plot size only applies to land acquired after 1st January 2019.
Example 68
Nshuti buys a residential plot in the year 2019. The plot is 400 square metres in size. The land tax rate determined by the District Council for the location is FRW 80 per square metre. Assuming that the Minister in charge of housing announced that the standard-sized surface for a residential house is 300 square metres, Nshuti's tax on land is increased for the remaining 100 square metres. Nshuti's tax due on land is calculated as follows:
Step 1: Calculation of the land tax on the parcel using the standard land tax rate = 400m2 * FRW 80 = FRW 32,000
Step 2: Calculation of the additional land tax for the area exceeding the standard parcel size = 100 m2 * FRW 80 * 50% = FRW 4,000
Step 3: Total land tax due = FRW 32,000 (from Step 1) + FRW 4,000 (from Step 2) = FRW 36,000

Tax rate on undeveloped land
Undeveloped land attracts a 100% additional tax to the land tax rate determined by the District Council. The land is considered as undeveloped if it has not been used for the intended purpose.

When is the deadline to declare and pay Immovable Property Tax?
Immovable Property Tax declaration is required and paid on an annual basis, for each immovable property. The tax period is the calendar year, from 1st January until 31st December. The deadline to declare and pay Immovable Property Tax by is 31st December of the same year.
However, in the event of changes in the value of the immovable property by more than 20% within an assessment cycle, the taxpayer must submit a new tax

declaration reflecting these value changes and pay it within one month.

What happens if the Immovable Property changes ownership during the tax period?
If Immovable Property is purchased in a given tax period, the old owner must declare and pay the amount including the month of the ownership transfer. The new owner must declare and pay Immovable Property Tax for the remaining months.
No transfer of ownership of an immovable property can take place without all due taxes having been paid to RRA.




Trading License Tax
What is Trading License Tax?
Trading License Tax, also informally known as 'patente', is a tax levied on any person or business conducting profit-oriented activities. Trading License Tax must be declared and paid for each business branch or premises.
Trading License Tax enables the regulation of businesses, ensuring accountability and the enforcement of proper commercial, employment and health and safety standards. Trading License Tax is required to be paid each year to receive the Trading License Tax certificate that must be displayed by all business branches.
Who must register for Trading License Tax?
Any person or business conducting profit-oriented activities in Rwanda is required to register for Trading License Tax. It is important to note that the Trading License Tax must be declared and paid regardless of whether the taxpayer actually makes a profit, as long as it is the intention to do so.
It is illegal to conduct profit-oriented activities of any kind without a Trading License Tax certificate.
Exemptions from trading licence tax applies to:
- Non-commercial State organs
- Small and medium enterprises during the first 24 months of establishment. After expiration of the

24 months, the taxpayer must declare and pay Trading License Tax within seven days.

Taxpayers registered for Trading License Tax must also declare and pay Public Cleaning Service Fees on a monthly basis, see page 322 for more details. This excludes trading licence taxpayers using motor vehicles or taxpayers liable to market fees.
How many times must Trading License Tax be paid by the same taxpayer?
Trading License Tax is based on the locations of the profit-oriented activities. If a taxpayer has multiple business branches, even of the same business, Trading License Tax must be paid for each of the branches, as well as for the head office.

This principle also applies to motor vehicles, including motorcycles, and motorboats. If a taxpayer has multiple motor vehicles and motorboats used for profit-oriented activities, Trading License Tax must be paid for each.
On the other hand, if a taxpayer carries out multiple activities by the same company at the same premises, Trading License Tax is only paid once for that premises.

What are the rates for Trading License Tax?
There are two different schedules for calculating the rates of Trading License Tax, depending upon whether the taxpayer is also registered for Value Added Tax (VAT).
Firstly, if the taxpayer is registered for VAT or the yearly turnover is at least FRW 20 million, the tax due generally depends on the turnover declared for Corporate Income Tax (CIT) or VAT of the previous calendar year. If the taxpayer has not declared the annual turnover through CIT or VAT for the previous year at the time of Trading License Tax declaration, the taxpayer needs to indicate

the annual turnover in the declaration. The Trading License Tax depends on the annual turnover in the following way:

Annual Turnover
Trading License Tax Due
Below FRW 40,000,000
FRW 60,000
Between FRW 40,000,001
to FRW 60,000,000
FRW 90,000
Between FRW 60,000,001
to FRW 150,000,000
FRW 150,000
Above FRW 150,000,001
FRW 250,000
Note that as each separate branch must pay Trading License Tax, the annual turnover should relate to that branch. Therefore, a taxpayer may pay different rates of Trading License Tax for different branches.
Secondly, if the taxpayer is not registered for VAT or the turnover is below FRW 20 million, the tax due depends upon the type of business and the location, as shown below.

Type of profit-making activity
Rural Area
Urban Area
City of Kigali
Traders without shops, and technicians who do not use machines
FRW 4,000
FRW 6,000
FRW 8,000

Transport activities on motorcycles
FRW 8,000
FRW 8,000
FRW 8,000
Transport activities on all motor vehicles except motorcycles
 FRW 40,000
 FRW 40,000
 FRW 40,000
Transport activities on motor boats
 FRW 20,000
 FRW 20,000
 FRW 20,000
Other profit oriented activities
 FRW 20,000
 FRW 30,000
 FRW 40,000
It is important to note that the location - rural area, urban area or City of Kigali - is decided on an annual basis at the village-level by the District Council. Moreover, not all of Kigali City province is designated as 'City of Kigali' for Trading License Tax purposes. Taxpayers should contact RRA if their location designation is not known. In the LGT system, the location designation when declaring is referred to as 'Category Type'.

When is the deadline to declare and pay Trading License Tax?
Trading License Tax is required to be declared and paid on an annual basis. The tax period is the calendar year,

from 1st January until 31st December. The deadline to declare and pay Trading License Tax by is 31st January of the same year.

What happens if the profit-making activities start or end during the tax period?
If taxable activities begin during a calendar year tax period, the taxpayer may pay Trading License Tax equivalent to the remaining months including the month in which the taxable activities began. Trading License Tax must be declared and paid before beginning the taxable activities.

If taxable activities end during a calendar year tax period, and the full rate Trading License Tax has been paid for the

whole calendar year tax period, the taxpayer may be entitled to a refund, subject to an audit, equivalent to the remaining months excluding the month in which the taxable activities ended or changed.
Similarly, if taxable activities change during a calendar year, the taxpayer may be entitled to a refund, or be required to pay additional tax, depending upon the nature of the change in taxable activities.
However, taxpayers conducting regular seasonal or periodic activities must pay the full rate Trading License Tax for the whole calendar year tax period, even if the taxable activities do not occur throughout the whole calendar year tax period.
What is the Trading License Tax Certificate?
After declaring and paying Trading License Tax for each branch, taxpayers can print a Trading License Tax certificate for each branch. This can be done on the LGT system, see page 292 for more details.
The Trading License Tax Certificates must be clearly displayed at the entrance of the business branch or clearly attached to the motor vehicle (including motorcycles) or motorboat for which the tax was declared and paid. The taxpayer must also be able to present the Trading License Tax Certificate at all times upon request.

Rental Income Tax
What is Rental Income Tax?
Rental Income Tax is a tax levied on the income generated from rented land and buildings. The land and buildings are referred to as the 'Immovable Property' and Rental Income Tax must be declared and paid on rented immovable properties in addition to Immovable Property Tax.
Who must register for Rental Income Tax?
Any person or business who is not subject to corporate income tax and who receives income from a rented immovable property located in Rwanda, is required to register for Rental Income Tax.
What is the taxable income for Rental Income Tax?
Rental Income Tax is not charged on the total (gross) rental income. Rental Income Tax allows for exemptions for expenses. This is intended to encourage landlords to provide high quality and well maintained properties for their tenants.
There are two different methods of calculating taxable income for Rental Income Tax, depending upon whether the taxpayer has taken out bank loans to fund the construction or purchase of the rented immovable property.

Firstly, if the taxpayer has no loans relating to the immovable property, the taxable income is calculated by:
Taxable Income = gross rental income * 50%
Secondly, if the taxpayer does have loans relating to the immovable property, he or she can deduct the actual bank interest payments within the tax period. From the tax period 2019 onwards, the taxable income is calculated by:
Taxable Income = gross rental income * 50% - interest paid
What are the rates of Rental Income Tax?
Rental Income Tax is a progressive tax. This means that there are different tax rates depending on taxpayer's taxable income, as described above. The groupings of taxable rental income are called tax brackets. The tax rates for each tax bracket are:

Annual taxable income
Marginal tax rate
Below FRW 180,000
0%
Between FRW 180,001 to FRW 1,000,000
20%
Above FRW 1,000,001
30%
It is important to note that these tax rates are marginal. This means that for each taxpayer in each year: the first

FRW 180,000 that the taxpayer earns is taxed at 0%, the next FRW 820,000 earned is taxed at 20% and any remaining income is taxed at 30%. This means that no taxpayer is made worse off by receiving income in a higher tax bracket.




When is the deadline to declare and pay Rental Income Tax?
Rental Income Tax is required to be declared and paid on an annual basis. The tax period is the calendar year, from 1st January until 31st December. However, the deadline to declare and pay Rental Income Tax from the year 2019 onwards is 31st January of the following year.



Is it required to submit rental contracts to RRA?
The taxpayer is required to submit the rental contract, signed by the taxpayer and the tenant, to RRA within fifteen (15) days of the date the contract was signed.
In the event of any amendment or termination of the rental contract, the taxpayer is required to notify RRA within 15 days, and submit the amended rental contract.
There is no obligation of the tenant to submit the rental contract. However, tenants can help to ensure the tax compliance of their landlords by submitting their rental contracts to RRA at any time. Rental contracts can be submitted by the tenant to any RRA office or tax centre.

Local Government Fees
What are local government fees?
There are a wide range of local government fees. These can be for taxpayers who conduct profit-oriented activities or who require services or authorisations from District Offices. The full list and details of local government fees is displayed on page 320.
Which third parties also collect local government fees?
Ngali Holdings Ltd is mandated to support RRA in collecting all local government fees. Millennium Savings and Investment Cooperative (MISIC) also collects parking fees.
In addition, the declaration and payment of the following local government fees is now processed through the e- Government platform known as Irembo or Rwanda Online:
- Civil status certificates, including Birth, Marriage and Death certificates.
- Transfer of land titles.
When are the deadlines to declare and pay different types of local government fees?
The deadline to declare and pay local government fees depends upon the basis of the fee. Fees charged for a service,  such  as  fees  on  official  certificates  and

documents to be notified by the public notary, must be declared and paid before the service is delivered.
Fees payable on a monthly basis, such as Public Cleaning Service Fees, must be declared and paid no later than the 5th of the following month. Fees payable on an annual basis, such as fees on advertising, must be declared and paid no later than 31st December of that year.
What are the different local government fees and rates?
The rates of many local government fees are variable, within certain thresholds, depending upon certain factors such as the location, i.e. urban, trading centre, or rural, or the vehicle details. The exact rate, within the thresholds, is determined by the District Council on an annual basis by the 30th June.
The list of local government fees, detailed in the Presidential Order Determining Fees Levied For Public Services And Certificates Delivered by Decentralized Entities are displayed below.
The processes for declaring these fees varies, depending upon the type of fee. These different processes for declaring are explained in more detail on page 331.
Note that vulnerable people may request a waiver from fees by the District Council for all of the following fees.
Market fees
- For traders in designated market areas.

- Up to FRW 10,000 per month.
Fees charged on public cemeteries
- For entombing a corpse in a public cemetery.
- FRW 500 - FRW 5,000 per tomb.
- Depend upon the cemetery.
Fees charged on parking
- For motor vehicles parking in lots under the authority of the District.
- FRW 100 per hour - FRW 20,000 per month
- Depend upon the size of the vehicle and duration of the parking.
- Collected by Millennium Savings and Investment Cooperative (MISIC).
- Exemptions for vehicles on official duty owned by State, Embassy, UN organizations and international organizations having an agreement with the Government of Rwanda; special vehicles for disabled people.
Fees charged on public parking
- For transport vehicles (buses and taxis) entering public bus/taxi parks.
- FRW 500 - FRW 10,000 per day, multiple entry.
- Depend upon the size of the transport vehicle.
Parking fees on boats
- For boats used for profit making activities.

- FRW 100 per day - FRW 5,000 per month.
- Depend upon the carrying capacity of the boat in tonnes, and whether it has an engine.
Public Cleaning Fees
- Payable by each branch of a business or institution, excluding:
o Households
o Orphanages / vulnerable persons' houses
o Government institutions which are not profit oriented
o Churches and faith-based organisations not involved in profit oriented activities
o United Nations institutions and embassies
o People carrying out their activities in market places paying market fees
- FRW 500 - FRW 10,000 per month.
   - Depends upon the location and nature of activity. Fees on civil marriage done not on official business days
- Up to FRW 10,000 per marriage.
- District Council determines the official business days for civil marriage.
Fees on services related to the documents of immovable property
- A range of services including changing official ownership, map requests and building permits.
-	FRW 1,200 - FRW 60,000.

- Depend upon the service requested. Building permits depend upon the floor area in square metres.
- Vulnerable people may request to be exempted from building permit fees by the District Council.
Fees on official certificates and documents to be notified by the public notary
- For official certificates (such as civil status, birth or death) or the notification of documents.
-  FRW 500 - FRW 5,000.
- Depends upon the type of certificate or document to be notified.
Fees on authorisation to make or burn bricks and tiles
- Any person intending to make or burn bricks and tiles must request authorisation from the District.
- FRW 10,000 per year.
Fees on advertising billboards and banners
- Any person putting up advertising billboards and banners must request authorisation from the District.
- FRW 10,000 - FRW 20,000 per square metre for each side of regular billboards per year.
- FRW 60,000 - FRW 100,000 for billboards using information technology per year.
- FRW 5,000 - FRW 10,000 per day for banners
- Exemptions include:

o Advertising on buildings and vehicles owned by a company.
o Billboards or signposts showing the direction of a given activity but no other commercial advertising message.
Fees on boat number plates
- For the number plate required to operate a boat.
- FRW 5,000 - FRW 15,000 per number plate.
- Depend upon whether the boat has an engine.
Fees on bicycle number plates
- For bicycles used for profit making activities.
- FRW 1,000 per number plate.
Fees on communication towers
- For erected communication towers.
- FRW 2,000 per vertical metre per year.
- FRW 1,000 per vertical metre per year for any underlying building or structure.
Fees on transport of materials from quarries and forests
- For transport of materials from quarries and forests.
- FRW 1,000 per tonne, payable on every loading.

Tax Centres
In order to facilitate taxpayers, RRA has a widespread network of more than 130 tax centres spread across the country. Taxpayers can register and declare LGT and Fees at each of these tax centres. The opening hours of each tax centre is 07:00 to 17:00 on Monday to Friday, excluding national holidays.
If there are any difficulties in finding a tax centre, or any problems of access or service, please contact the regional coordinator listed for each province. The list of tax centres by province and sector are displayed below:
City of Kigali
Head of Compliance Contact Number: +250 788185802

Gasabo
Nyarugenge
-	Gatsata
-	Gitega
-	Kabuga
-	Nyakabanda
-	Remera
-	Nyarugenge
-	RRA HQ, Kimihurura
-	Nyabugogo
Kicukiro

-	Gikondo

-	Kicukiro

-	Nyarugunga

Eastern Province
Region Coordinator Contact Number: +250 78818 5777

Bugesera
Gatsibo
-	Batima
-	Kiramuruzi
-	Gashora
-	Muhura
-	Nyabagendwa
-	Ngarama
-	Ruhuha
-	Kabarore
-	Kabukuba
Kirehe
Kayonza
-	Kiyanzi
-	Gahini
-	Nganda
-	Kabarondo
-	Nyakarambi
-	Murundi
Ngoma
-	Rukara
-	Gashanda
-	Rwinkwavu
-	Rukira
Nyagatare
-	Sake
-	Karama
-	Ngoma
-	Gatunda
-	Zaza
-	Matimba
Rwamagana
-	Mimuri
-	Karenge
-	Nyagatare
-	Muyumbu
-	Tabagwe
-	Ntunga
-	Karangazi
-	Rubona

-	Rwamagana
Southern Province
Region Coordinator Contact Number: +250 78818 5580

Gisagara
Nyanza
-	Mugombwa
-	Ntyazo
-	Musha
-	Rurangazi
-	Ndora
-	Busoro
-	Save
-	Butantsinda
Huye
-	Busasamana
-	Ngoma
Nyaruguru
-	Simbi
-	Busanze
-	Ruhashya
-	Kiyonza
-	Rusatira
-	Nyagisozi
Ruhango
-	Muganza
-	Byimana
-	Kibeho
-	Kinazi
Kamonyi
-	Kabagari
-	Gacurabwenge
-	Ruhango
-	Kayenzi
Nyamagabe
-	Mugina
-	Kaduha
-	Musambira
-	Mushubi
-	Rukomo
-	Tare
-	Runda
-	Gasaka

Western Province
Region Coordinator Contact Number: +250 78818 5782

Nyamasheke
Rubavu
-	Bushenge
-	Busasamana
-	Gatare
-	Gisenyi
-	Karengera
-	Kabumba
-	Rangiro
-	Kanama
-	Ruharambuga
-	Kanzenze
-	Tyazo
-	Nyamyumba
Rutsiro
-	Rugerero
-	Gakeri
Karongi
-	Gihango
-	Gashali
-	Gisiza
-	Mubuga
-	Mukura
-	Mukungu
-	Muyira
-	Murambi
-	Nkora
-	Rubengera
Ngororero
-	Twumba
-	Birembo
Rusizi
-	Gatega
-	Bugarama
-	Kabaya
-	Giheke
-	Nyange
-	Kamembe
-	Ngororero
-	Muganza
-	Rusumo
-	Nyakabuye
Nyabihu
-	Nyakarenzo
-	Gasiza
-	Rwimbogo
-	Kora

-	Mukamira

-	Vunga

Northern Province
Region Coordinator Contact Number: +250 78818 5787

Musanze
Burera
-	Busogo
-	Butaro
-	Cyuve
-	Cyanika
-	Kinigi
-	Cyeru
-	Muhoza
-	Gahunga
-	Nkotsi
-	Rugengabale
Rulindo
Gicumbi
-	Buyoga
-	Byumba
-	Kinihira
-	Bukure
-	Kiyanza
-	Kaniga
-	Murambi
-	Miyove
-	Shyorongi
-	Rutare
Gakenke
-	Ruvune
-	Gakenke

-	Kivuruga

-	Muzo

-	Ruli

-	Rushashi

Registering for LGT and Fees
Taxpayers must register for LGT and fees with the help of staff at local government tax centres, listed on page 325.
Businesses are required to register for the LGT system, Trading License Tax and Public Cleaning Service Fees immediately after registering their business with RDB.
In order to register on the LGT system, the taxpayer must provide identification: either a Rwandan ID or Passport. The taxpayer must also provide their address and a mobile phone number. The taxpayer will be registered on the LGT system, and tax accounts will be set up for the relevant LGT and fees by RRA staff.
In addition, when registering for Rental Income Tax or Immovable Property Tax, taxpayers must provide the Unique Plot Identifier (UPI) for each of their properties.
Once registered, the taxpayer will be provided with a username, TIN and a password for the LGT system. The taxpayer will also receive an SMS and/or email confirming the registration.
If the taxpayer later is required to pay any additional LGT and fees for which they are not yet registered for, the taxpayer must return to any tax centre or RRA offices to set up the accounts for each of those LGT and fees.

Declaring Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees using the LGT system
The three types of LGT, Rental Income Tax, Trading License Tax and Immovable Property Tax, and the local government fees can be declared using the LGT system. The process of declaring each is similar, and described below.
Step 1: Login to the LGT System
Access the LGT system at https://localgov.rra.gov.rw or through the RRA website at http://www.rra.gov.rw and clicking on 'Pay District taxes here' on the right of the screen. This loads the following login screen:

The language can be changed by clicking on the flag icons in the top right corner, respectively English, Kinyarwanda and French.

Click 'Taxes' for the following LGT system login screen:

If a taxpayer does not know their TIN, see page 74.
If a taxpayer does not know their password, it can be reset by clicking 'Forgot Password' on the LGT system login and receiving a new password by SMS or email.
Step 2: Select the correct LGT or fee to declare
After logging in, the LGT system home page is loaded.


There are four modules available on the left of the screen: 'Registration', 'Declaration', 'Fee Payment Ticket' and 'Change Password'. Each of these modules is discussed in turn.
As taxpayers must register with LGT staff(see page 330) and cannot use the 'Registration' module to register. However, it does display confirmation of registration, and allows for printing of Trading License Tax Certificates.
The 'Declaration' module is where the three types of LGT are declared. Click 'Declaration' and the drop-down 'Taxes' option. Then choose the tax type and tax period that is being declared and click 'Submit'. Finally, click on the document number of the applicable declaration.



The 'Fees Payment Ticket' module is where fees can be declared and the drop-down provides the choice of a range of fee declarations:
- Fees on civil marriage conducted on a day other than an official business day
- Fees on services and documents of immovable property

- Fees on official certificates of a decentralized entity
- Fees on authorisation to make or burn clay bricks, tiles, or charcoal
- Market fees
- Fees on parking
- Fees on public parking
- Parking fees on boats
- Fees on small-scale quarry exploitation
- Fees on advertising
- Public Cleaning Service fees
- Fees for boat number plates
- Fees on bicycle number plates
- Fees on communication towers
- Fees on transport of materials from quarries and forests
The 'Change Password' module requires the taxpayer to enter the previous password, and the new password. The taxpayer is automatically required to change their password when first logging in to the LGT system with the RRA provided password.
Step 3: Complete declaration form and submit
Having selected the correct LGT or fee, enter the required information in the declaration form. The information that is required depends upon the type of LGT or fee. These are displayed in turn below.

Immovable Property Tax
The declaration for the Immovable Property Tax generally consists of three parts:
1. Part referring to the land.
2. Part referring to the building - if there is a building on the land.
3. Part referring to the entire immovable property.
In the first part of the declaration, the taxpayer does not have to enter any information about the land. Instead, the LGT system automatically displays all information determining the tax due on the land.
Note that if the construction of a building has been completed on the plot during the tax period so that the land is no longer undeveloped, the taxpayer needs to visit an RRA office to update the registration of the Immovable Property Tax to indicate that land is developed.
In the second part of the declaration, the taxpayer needs to provide information on the building (for developed land, only). In particular, the taxpayer needs to indicate the market value of the building. The taxpayer is also required to indicate building characteristics such as roofing , wall material, sewage system etc.
In the following section, the taxpayer is asked to indicate the total market value of the immovable property, which

includes both the building component and the land component.
Once the required information has been entered, click 'Calculate Tax'. The LGT system automatically displays:
1. The tax due on the land component, depending on the surface area of the plot and the tax rate on land.
2. The tax due on the building component, based on the market value and the tax rate on building.
3. The total tax due on the immovable property, potential penalties and interests in case of late declaration, as well as the total amount due.
Afterwards, certify that the declaration was done correctly before you 'Submit'.









Trading License Tax
The declaration form for Trading License Tax differs slightly depending upon whether the taxpayer has a yearly
- Turnover of at least FRW 20 million or is registered for Value Added Tax (VAT), or
- Turnover below FRW 20 million.
In general, if the taxpayer is VAT registered or the yearly turnover is at least FRW 20 million, the LGT system automatically takes the turnover from the taxpayer's declaration for Corporate Income Tax (CIT) or VAT for the previous tax period. If the CIT or VAT declaration does not exist, the taxpayer needs to enter the 'Annual Turnover', which is the total business income and sales declared during the previous tax year. If all the information is correct, click 'Calculate Tax' to display the tax due, and click to 'Submit' the declaration.



The declaration form if the annual turnover of the taxpayer is below FRW 20 million is displayed below. The type and location of business is already confirmed when registering, so no further details are required. If all the information is correct, click to 'Submit' the declaration.



Taxpayers registered for Trading License Tax are reminded to also declare and pay Public Cleaning Service Fees, see page 322 for more details.
Rental Income Tax
Having clicked on the document number of the relevant property for the tax type and tax period that is being declared, the following declaration form is displayed for Rental Income Tax.




The taxpayer must enter the monthly rent and the total amount of rental income received during the tax year. In addition, if bank interest is being paid on this property, the taxpayer must change 'Is Bank Interest paid' to 'Yes' and enter the additional required details.
Once all required information has been entered, click 'Continue with Declaration'. This generates an additional 'Rental Income Declaration' section. If all the information is correct, click 'Calculate Tax' to display the tax due, and click to 'Submit' the declaration.




Local Government Fees
The process of declaring local government fees varies depending upon the type of fee. In general, having selected the correct type of 'Fee Payment Ticket', enter the required information, and click 'Submit'. This Tax Handbook uses two examples to demonstrate the general processes of declaring local government fees.

Fees for civil marriage conducted on days other than official business days
The taxpayer must enter their personal details including their national ID number or passport number, name, date of birth, mobile number and the province, district and sector where they live. Some of these details may be automatically generated after entering the ID number.
The taxpayer can then choose the type of service that is required. This may include further drop-down options. Once selected, this automatically generates the correct amount that must be paid for that service, and the taxpayer can click to 'Submit' the fee declaration.


Public Cleaning Service Fees
The taxpayer can choose the type of service that is required. The drop-down menu only displays the types of local government fees that the taxpayer is registered for.
Depending upon the type of service, further information is required. Once all required information has been correctly entered, click to 'Submit' the fee declaration.




Step 4: View payment details via the Acknowledgement Receipt, email or SMS, and pay the total amount due
After successfully submitting the declaration, click to view the Acknowledgement Receipt. Alternatively, receive the payment details by email or SMS by entering an email address or phone number and clicking 'Send Email' or 'Send SMS'.

Use the RRA Reference Number to pay the total amount due. This must be paid before the deadline to avoid penalties and fines, see page 407 for more details on paying taxes.

Declaring LGT and Fees using M-Declaration
Taxpayers can use M-declaration for the following local government tax and fees:
- Trading License Tax (for taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 20 million and taxpayers not registered for VAT, only)
- Immovable Property Tax (available for plots without buildings, only)
- Public Cleaning Service Fees
- Market Fees
- Outsourced Fees (available for Ngali Holding Ltd, only)
The process for declaring these LGT and fees using M- declaration is explained below.
M-Declaration Process
The M-Declaration system is accessed by dialling *800#. The M-Declaration system has a series of screens, with number options, that are navigated by entering and sending the relevant number.
On the first screen, select a language: either English or Kinyarwanda.
On the next screen select which M-Declaration service is required. To declare LGT and fees, select '3. Local Government Taxes'.

At the following screen, select the type of tax or fee:
1. Immovable Property Tax
2. Trading License
3. Public Cleaning Service Fees
4. Market Fees
When the desired type of tax or fee is selected, first enter the 'TIN' and then follow the on-screen instructions, depending on the tax type.
Having entered all required information, the system calculates the tax to be paid, and generates the RRA Reference Number required for paying. For more details on paying taxes and fees, see page 407.

Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees Penalties and Fines
What are the penalties for late declaration of LGT?
A LGT registered taxpayer who has failed to submit a tax declaration within the required time must still declare and pay, and is subject to an additional three penalties:
- 1.5% interest of the unpaid tax due per month
- A fine equal to 40% of the tax due if the declaration is submitted late
- An additional fine for late payment of 10% of the tax due, up to a maximum of FRW 10,000




What are the penalties for late payment of LGT and fees?
A LGT registered taxpayer who has submitted a tax declaration, but failed to pay the full amount of taxes due within the required time must still pay the full amount of taxes due, and is subject to two additional penalties:
- 1.5% interest of the unpaid tax due per month
- 10% of the unpaid tax due, up to a maximum of FRW 100,000
The same penalties also apply to late payment of local government fees.
What are the penalties for not registering for Trading License Tax or not presenting a Trading License Tax certificate when requested?
It is illegal to conduct profit-oriented activities without having declared and paid Trading License Tax for the concerned tax period. Failure to present a valid Trading License Tax certificate when requested is subject to a penalty of FRW 10,000. In addition, the District has the right to temporarily close down any business activities.

What are the penalties for a taxpayer who declares incomplete, incorrect or fraudulent information?
A taxpayer who submits a declaration, but is found to have declared incomplete, incorrect or fraudulent information, must pay the unpaid tax due and is subject to an additional penalty of 40% of the tax due.
What are the rules concerning interest?
The rules concerning interest are the same as for interest on domestic taxes, as explained on page 97.

Customs
Explanation of Customs
What is importing and exporting?
Importing is when goods are brought into Rwanda from an external country. Exporting is when goods are taken from Rwanda into an external country.
This Tax Handbooks aims to provide all the information required for taxpayers to import or export any goods. However, as taxes are often required on imports, there is a greater focus in this Tax Handbook on importing.
For a greater focus on exporting, see the Export Handbook developed by Kigali based research firm, Laterite, and commissioned by Trade Mark East Africa (TMEA) and the Private Sector Federation (PSF). The Export Handbook is available at:
https://www.laterite.com/journal/export-handbook- for-rwanda-now-available
Who can import or export?
Any taxpayer may import or export goods. No additional registration is required, but individuals or businesses without TINs must register with RDB or RRA as normal.
The majority of importing and exporting procedures are carried out by licensed companies called Clearing Agents on behalf of the taxpayers, see page 374 for more details.

What are Customs Duties?
In this Tax Handbook, customs duties are defined as all taxes, duties, levies and fees that are required to be paid to RRA on imported or exported goods.
Therefore, customs duties include:
- Taxes paid on imports that are also paid on domestic goods
o Value Added Tax (VAT)
o Excise Duty
- Taxes that are specifically paid on imports
o Import Duty
o Withholding Tax of 5% (WHT 5%)
o Infrastructure Development Levy (IDL)
o Strategic Reserves Levy (SRL)
o African Union Levy (AUL).
- Taxes that are specifically paid on exports
o Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins
- Small fees on imports and exports
o Computer Processing Fee
o Quality Inspection Fee (QIF)
Customs duties ensure that local and foreign business can compete fairly, by ensuring a level playing field (VAT and Excise Duty), encouraging intra-regional trade (Import Duty), ensuring compliance of Income Tax (WHT 5%), funding beneficial projects (IDL, SRL and AUL) and supporting domestic manufacturing industries (Export

Duty on Raw Hides and Skins). For more details on all types of customs duties, see page 363.
What is the East African Community Customs Union?
The East African Community (EAC) Customs Union is formed of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda. The main features of the EAC Customs Union are:
- A shared set of import duties applied on goods from countries outside the EAC. This is referred to as the Common External Tariff (CET), see page 363 for details.
- Zero rate of import duty, and no quotas, applied on goods from countries within the EAC with valid Certificates of Origin, see page 359 for details.
- Shared procedures, safety measures, valuation methods, trade policy and terminology governed by the EAC Customs Management Act (CMA).
Rwanda is also a member of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) free trade area.
What is the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW)?
The ReSW is an online portal aimed at facilitating trade by ensuring all trade related information required by government institutions is submitted only once. This reduces the compliance burden and time taken when importing or exporting goods. The ReSW also increases

transparency by clearly showing when information was submitted, changed or approved, and by whom.
The ReSW is used by Clearing Agents, Customs Officials and other government institutions as required. Clearing Agents use the ReSW on behalf of taxpayers during the importing and exporting process. For more details on Clearing Agents, see page 374.
How are imported and exported goods valued?
Imports are valued as Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF). This is equal to the cost of the goods, the cost of any insurance paid on the goods and the freight costs of transporting the goods to the first point of entry of the EAC. Exports are valued as Free On Board (FOB). This is equal to the cost of the goods only.
Whether using the CIF or FOB valuation, the declared value must be supported by commercial invoices, as well as insurance and freight invoices where applicable.
If goods have been purchased in a foreign currency, declare the value in the currency of the invoice. The ReSW system then uses the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR) exchange rate to convert this into Rwandan francs.



What are Harmonised System (HS) Codes?
Harmonised System (HS) Codes is an internationally standardised to classify traded products. The taxpayer provides a description of the type of goods to the Clearing Agent, who is trained to select the correct HS Code. Selecting the correct HS Code is important for ensuring the correct amount of tax is declared and paid.



What documents are required when importing or exporting?
The importing or exporting taxpayer must provide the Clearing Agent with valid documents proving the value and authenticity of their consignment.
The mandatory documents that taxpayers importing goods originating from within the EAC must provide are:
- Commercial Invoice or equivalent document
o Showing the value and description of all goods within the consignment.
- Packing List
o Lists the goods being transported within the consignment.
There are two additional mandatory documents that taxpayers importing goods originating from outside the EAC must provide to RRA:
- Freight Invoice

o Showing the cost of transport and insurance for the consignment, if not included in the commercial invoice.
- Bill of Lading / Airway Bill
o A contract between the owner of the ship
/ plane transporting the consignment and the importing taxpayer.
The only mandatory document that taxpayers exporting goods must provide to RRA:
- Commercial Invoice or equivalent document
o Showing the value and description of all goods within the consignment.
Additional documents that taxpayers may be required to provide when importing or exporting depend upon the type of goods and their origin. Clearing Agents are trained to inform taxpayers which documents are necessary for their consignment. Without the required documents, Customs Officials will not permit the goods to be imported or exported. Examples of goods that may require additional documents include:
- Goods produced within the EAC or COMESA
- Agricultural goods and inputs including food
- Chemicals and cosmetics
- Medical equipment and pharmaceuticals
- Worn clothes

What documents are required to prove that goods being imported were produced in the EAC or COMESA?
Imported goods that are produced within the EAC or COMESA can be subject to exemptions. In addition, imported goods that are produced within the EAC only are granted automatic access to the pre-clearance facility, see page 393 for details. These benefits require a Certificate of Origin delivered by the exporting country.
The EAC Rules of Origin document explains the criteria that goods should meet to be considered as originating from EAC partner states. This Tax Handbook does not include all details or exceptions. The EAC Rules of Origin document is on the RRA website at:
http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=244.
Similarly, the COMESA Rules of Origin document is available at:
https://rwandatrade.rw/procedure/17/21?l=en
How do Rwandan exporters certify that goods being exported were produced in Rwanda?
Rwandan exporters can apply for a Certificate of Origin through their Clearing Agent. The Clearing Agent applies on the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) and provides the required evidence at any Border Post or Dry Port. There are different fees and requirements depending upon the country to which the goods are

exported. There is also a Simplified Certificate of Origin available for smaller value consignments, see page 390 for more details.
There are many incentives that Rwandan exporters can benefit from, depending on the country being exported to. This includes EAC, COMESA, the European Union (EU) and the United States of America (USA), see the Export Handbook, referenced on page Error! Bookmark not defined., for more details.
What are the different Customs channels?
After import or export declarations have been submitted and paid, the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) system assigns the consignment to a Customs channel. The Customs channel refers to the level of verification from Customs Officers required for that consignment.
The ReSW uses a risk management system to assign Customs channels depending upon the past history of the taxpayer and the types of goods amongst other factors. However, Customs Officers are authorised to carry out surprise checks or additional verifications regardless of the assigned Customs channel.
The Customs channels are:
Green - No verification, immediate release of goods, no post-clearance audit

Blue - No verification, immediate release of goods, available to taxpayers with history of correct compliance, scope for post-clearance audit
Yellow - Documentary verification, scope for post- clearance audit
Red - Documentary and physical verification, scope for post-clearance audit
Documentary verification requires Customs Officers to check declarations and supplementary documentation. Physical verification requires Customs Officers to check the actual consignment.
If there are any problems with verification, the Customs Officers will lodge a 'query' which may require a second assessment notice, additional taxes to be paid or further actions to be taken. See page 404 for more details on Customs penalties.
If there are no problems with verification, the Customs Official changes the Customs channel to 'Green' in the ReSW system and gives the taxpayer a release order.
What is a Post-Clearance Audit (PCA)?
In addition to documentary and physical verification at border posts, importing or exporting taxpayers may also be subject to Post-Clearance Audits (PCAs). PCAs are explained in more detail on the EAC website at:
https://www.eac.int/documents

The different types and processes for PCAs is similar to other RRA audits, see page 33 for details.
What is a Stay of Application?
A 'stay of application' is a different rate of import duty from the Common External Tariff (CET) available for specific products. These are negotiated on a country-by- country basis, but once agreed are available for all importing taxpayers. The stay of application rate can be higher or lower than the CET rate. Stay of applications apply on annual fiscal year, 1st July to 30th June, basis.
Once approved, the stay of applications are published by product (using HS Codes) in EAC gazettes, available at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=349&L=0

Customs Duties
What are the different Customs Duties?
The full list of customs duties is displayed on page 353. The rates and bases of each type are described below.
Import Duty
Import Duty is a tax paid specifically on imported goods originating from outside of the EAC. The EAC Customs Union ensures a zero (0%) rate of Import Duty on all imports on goods originating from within the EAC, see page 359 for details.
The EAC Customs Union means that the rates of import duty are agreed in the Common External Tariff (CET). The CET sets Import Duty rates on a product-by-product basis for each HS Code. The CET is available on the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=243.
The different Import Duty rates also allow for certain types of goods to be prioritised. In general, CET rates are:
- Capital goods and raw materials = 0%
- Intermediate goods = 10%
- Finished goods = 25%
- Sensitive Goods = Varying rate
There are two exceptions: 'Stay of Applications' and the 'Duty Remission Scheme'. For more details see page 362 and 394 respectively.

The amount of Import Duty to be paid is calculated by: Import Duty = CIF * Import Duty rate
In import declarations and assessment notices, Import Duty is referred to under code 'C', for example 'C02'.
Handling Fees (HF)
Handling Fees are not actually paid, but are included in VAT and Excise Duty calculations. HF is calculated by:
Handling Fees (HF) = Gross Weight (kg) * FRW 10
Gross Weight (kg) refers to the weight of the goods in the consignment in kilograms, including the weight of the containers or transporting equipment.
Excise Duty
Excise Duty is paid on specific products, regardless of whether they are produced domestically or imported. For more details on the products subject to Excise Duty, the basis and the rates, see page 233.
The Excise Duty to be paid on a specific basis is calculated by an amount of tax per unit of the product. The Excise Duty to be paid on an ad valorem basis is calculated by:
Excise Duty = (CIF + Import Duty + HF) * Excise Rate
In import declarations and assessment notices, Excise Duty is referred to under code 'E', for example 'E01'.

Value Added Tax (VAT)
VAT is paid on the majority of products, regardless of whether they are produced domestically or imported. The normal rate of VAT in Rwanda is 18%. For details on products that are exempted or zero-rated, see page 192.
Therefore, the VAT to be paid on imported goods is calculated by:
VAT = (CIF + Import Duty + Excise Duty + HF) * VAT rate
Any VAT previously paid in a foreign country is not offset when calculating the VAT that is to be paid at Customs. This is expected to be refunded at the country of origin.
Once VAT has been paid on imports at Customs, this amount can be claimed back in subsequent domestic VAT declarations. See page 203 for the information required when claiming back VAT paid on imports.
In import declarations and assessment notices, VAT is referred to under code 'V', for example 'V02'.
Withholding Tax of 5% (WHT 5%)
WHT 5% is a tax paid specifically on imported goods. WHT 5% is paid by all taxpayers except for taxpayers with a valid Quitus Fiscal certificate, see page 49.
The WHT 5% to be paid on imported goods is calculated by:
Withholding Tax of 5% (WHT 5%) = CIF * 5%

Once WHT 5% has been paid at Customs, this amount can be claimed back in subsequent domestic Income Tax (PIT or CIT) declarations by the importing taxpayers. This can be claimed back in either the annual or Instalment Quarterly Prepayment (IQP) declarations. See page 131 for the information required when claiming back WHT 5% paid on imports.
In import declarations and assessment notices, WHT 5% is referred to under code 'W', for example 'W01'.
Infrastructure Development Levy (IDL)
IDL is a tax paid specifically on imported goods from outside of the EAC. IDL contributes to regional trade- facilitation infrastructure projects. IDL is paid on all imported goods, with the exception of those detailed in Article 5 of Law N°34/2015 of 30/06/2015, including:
- Goods originating from within the EAC
- Reproductive animals and plants
- Pharmaceuticals
- Veterinary products
- Medical equipment
- Industrial machinery
- Solar energy equipment
- Duty Remission products
The IDL to be paid on imported goods is calculated by: Infrastructure Development Levy (IDL) = CIF * 1.5%

Strategic Reserves Levy (SRL)
SRL is a tax paid specifically on imported fuel and petroleum products. SRL funds the purchase and safe maintenance of greater reserves of fuel. The SRL is paid at a specific rate per litre of fuel, calculated by:
Strategic Reserves Levy (SRL) = FRW 32.73 per litre of fuel
African Union Levy (AUL)
AUL is a tax paid specifically on imported goods. AUL contributes to the financing of African Union activities. AUL is paid on all imported goods, except for those subject to exemptions by the 5th Schedule of the EAC CMA, Duty Remission or VAT.
The AUL paid on imported goods is calculated by: African Union Levy (AUL) = CIF * 0.2%
In import declarations and assessment notices, AUL is referred to under code 'AU', for example 'AU0'.
Motor Vehicle Registration Fees (MVF)
MVF are paid specifically on imported motor vehicles. MVF must be paid regardless of the type of vehicle or the exemptions available to the importing taxpayer. For more details on importing motor vehicles see page 397.
MVF vary depending upon the engine capacity of the vehicle as measured in cubic centimetres (cc):


Engine Capacity (cc) between
Motor Vehicle Fees (MVF) for all Motor Vehicles
0 to 1,000
FRW 75,000
1,001 to 1,500
FRW 160,000
1,501 to 3,000
FRW 250,000
3,001 to 4,500
FRW 420,000
4,501 and above
FRW 560,000
Special Engine
FRW 640,000
The special engine category includes semi-trailers, construction vehicles and other very heavy vehicles.
Road Toll
Road Toll is a fee paid specifically on foreign registered trucks entering Rwanda. Road Toll contributes to the Road Maintenance Fund (RMF) in Rwanda.
It is important to note that the Road Toll is paid per truck entering Rwanda, not per declaration. Therefore, this is paid separately to other Customs Duties.
The Road Toll has two different rates, depending on the size of the trucks. The Road Toll must be paid by trucks every time they enter Rwanda. The rate of Road Toll is:
- $76 USD for simple trucks
- $152 USD for heavy commercial trucks

Road Toll is referred to as 'FER' in assessment notices.
Fuel Levy
Fuel Levy is a tax paid specifically on imported fuel and petroleum products. Fuel Levy contributes to the Road Maintenance Fund (RMF) in Rwanda. The Fuel Levy is paid at a specific rate per litre of fuel. The Fuel Levy to be paid on imported fuel is calculated by:
Fuel Levy = FRW 115 per litre of fuel
As with the Fuel Levy, Road Toll is referred to as 'FER' in import declarations and assessment notices.
Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins
Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins is paid on all exports of unprocessed hides and skins to outside of the EAC. The rate of Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins is either:
- 80% of FOB, or $0.52 per Kg, whichever is higher
In export declarations and assessment notices, Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins is referred to as code 'EX1'.
Computer Processing Fee
The Computer Processing Fee is a fee paid for every import or export declaration that is submitted.
The Computer Processing Fee is:
- FRW 3,000 per regular declaration
- FRW 500 per simplified declaration, see page 390 for more details on simplified declarations

Computer Processing Fee is listed as a 'global fee' in import/export declarations and assessment notices.
Quality Inspection Fees (QIF)
Quality Inspection Fees (QIF) are fees paid on specific imported products. Rwanda Standards Board (RSB) is the institution which both designates which products are required to be inspected and carries out the inspections. RRA collects QIF on behalf of RSB. The QIF to be paid on imported goods is calculated by:
Quality Inspection Fees (QIF) = FOB * 0.2%
In import declarations and assessment notices, QIF are referred to under code 'QIF'.
Warehousing Fees
Warehousing Fees are paid when storing consignments in warehouses. It is important to note that these are paid directly to the warehouses and not to RRA. Rates may vary according to the warehouse, the size and weight of the consignment and how long it has been stored for.


Example 90
Rukundo is importing a consignment of sports shoes from the United Kingdom. The HS Code is 6404.11.00 'Sports footwear...'. The net weight of the consignment is 75kg.
The CIF value of the consignment is:

-	Cost = FRW 2,800,000
- Insurance = FRW 75,000
- Freight = FRW 350,000
- CIF (Cost + Insurance + Freight) = FRW 3,225,000
The Customs Duties that must be paid are:

- Import Duty = FRW 3,225,000 * 25% = FRW 806,250
- Handling Fees (not paid) = FRW 10/kg * 75kg = FRW 750
-	VAT = (FRW 3,225,000 + FRW 806,250 + FRW 750)
* 18% = FRW 725,760
-	WHT 5% = FRW 3,225,000 * 5% = FRW 161,250
-	IDL = FRW 3,225,000 * 1.5% = FRW 48,375
-	AUL = FRW 3,225,000 * 0.2% = FRW 6,450
- Computer Processing Fee = FRW 3,000
Therefore, the total duties to be paid are FRW 1,751,835.
Of this, the VAT of FRW 725,760 can be claimed back in domestic VAT declarations (as Rukundo is not the final consumer), and the WHT 5% of FRW 161,250 can be claimed back in domestic Income Tax declarations.

Example 91
Ubumwe is importing a consignment of Tusker beer from Kenya. The HS Code is 2203.00.90 'Beer made from malt'. The net weight of the consignment is 1,400kg. The CIF
value of the consignment is:

-	Cost = FRW 1,100,000
- Insurance = FRW 55,000
- Freight = FRW 450,000
- CIF (Cost + Insurance + Freight) = FRW 1,605,000
The customs duties that must be paid are:

- Import Duty = FRW 1,605,000 * 0% = FRW 0
- Handling Fee (not paid) = FRW 10/kg * 1,400kg = FRW 14,000
-	Excise Duty = (FRW 1,605,000 + FRW 401,250 + FRW 14,000) * 60% = FRW 1,212,150
-	VAT = (FRW 1,605,000 + FRW 401,250 + FRW 14,000 + FRW 1,212,150) * 18% = FRW 581,832
-	WHT 5% = FRW 1,605,000 * 5% = FRW 80,250
- Computer Processing Fee = FRW 3,000
-	QIF = (FRW 1,100,000) * 0.2% = FRW 2,200
As Kenya is in the EAC Customs Unions the total duties to be paid are FRW 1,893,432.
Of this, the VAT of FRW 581,832 can be claimed back in domestic VAT declarations (as Ubumwe is not the final consumer), and the WHT 5% of FRW 80,250 can be
claimed back in domestic Income Tax declarations.

Example 92
Amahoro is importing a consignment of petrol from the United States of America. The HS Code is 2710.12.10 'Motor Spirit (gasoline) regular'. The consignment is 9,000 litres being transported in a semi-trailer truck. The
CIF value of the consignment is:

-	Cost = FRW 6,500,000
- Insurance = FRW 400,000
- Freight = FRW 600,000
- CIF (Cost + Insurance + Freight) = FRW 7,500,000
The Customs Duties that must be paid are:

- Excise Duty = FRW 183/litre * 9,000 litres = FRW 1,647,000
-	WHT 5% = FRW 7,500,000 * 5% = FRW 375,000
-	IDL = FRW 7,500,000 * 1.5% = FRW 172,500
- SRL = FRW 32.73/litre * 9,000 litres = FRW 112,500
-	Road Toll = $152 * FRW 832/$ = FRW 126,464
- Fuel Levy = FRW 115/litre * 9,000 litres = FRW 1,035,000
-	AUL= FRW 6,500,000 * 0.2% = FRW 13,000
- Computer Processing Fee = FRW 3,000
Therefore, the total duties to be paid are FRW 3,539,534.
Of this, the WHT 5% of FRW 375,000 can be claimed back in domestic Income Tax declarations.
Clearing Agents
What are Clearing Agents?
A clearing agent (or customs agent) is a company licensed to transact any business related to the import or export of goods. Clearing agents interact with the revenue authority on behalf of the taxpayer. Clearing agents are trained and licensed by the revenue authority ensuring that all customs procedures are followed correctly.
There are more than 150 clearing agents licensed to operate by RRA. For the full list, see the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=57.
Who needs to contract Clearing Agents?
Any taxpayer wishing to import or export goods valued at more than FRW 500,000 is required to contract a clearing agent to carry out the importation or exportation process on their behalf.
What are the roles of taxpayers and Clearing Agents?
The importing or exporting taxpayers must contract clearing agents. The taxpayers may contract different clearing agents to conduct the foreign country and Rwandan import/export procedures.
The taxpayer is responsible for providing the clearing agent with all required documents (see page 357 for the documents required for imports and exports) and for

paying all due taxes and fees. These can be paid by the taxpayer directly, or through the clearing agent.
The clearing agent is responsible for exercising due diligence in ensuring the documentation provided by the taxpayer is valid and accurate, correctly identifying the HS Codes, submitting import or export declarations, printing assessment notices and if necessary paying Customs Duties on the taxpayers' behalf, facilitating any queries or verification by Customs staff and awaiting and receiving release orders. The clearing agent retains responsibility for the goods until they leave the border post or dry port.
What is the licensing process of Clearing Agents?
Clearing agents must apply for a license from RRA in order to operate. If approved, clearing agents are licensed for a period of at least one year, before they must be renewed. RRA may also suspend or revoke a license in the event of a breach of procedure, negligence or unsatisfactory conduct.
Who is responsible in the event of penalties and fines?
Both taxpayers and clearing agents are jointly liable in the event of penalties and fines. Contracts between the taxpayers and the clearing agents should make clear the responsibilities of each party in such cases.



Border Posts and Dry Ports
What are Border Posts and Dry Ports?
Importing and exporting of goods can only be done at authorised RRA border posts, customs offices outside Rwanda and dry ports. Border posts are RRA offices at the border with a neighbouring country, whilst dry ports are inland RRA offices. There are RRA customs offices outside Rwanda at Dar Es Salaam and Mombasa.
The list of currently operating RRA border posts and dry ports is displayed on page 380. However, RRA is receptive to taxpayers' behaviour, and may open or close border posts depending upon demand and the frequency of trade. Taxpayers may contact RRA to request to import or export through other potential border posts.
Border Posts
Rwanda borders Uganda to the north, Tanzania to the East, Burundi to the south and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) to the west. The border posts for each of the neighbouring countries are:
- Uganda
o Buziba, Gatuna, Kagitumba, Cyanika
- Tanzania
o Rusumo
- Burundi

o Akanyaru-Haut, Rutete / Nemba, Ruhwa
- DRC
o Gisenyi Corniche, Gisenyi Poids-Lourds, Bugarama, Rusizi 1, Rusizi 2 / Mururu
Customs office outside Rwanda
Goods that are imported from Dar Es Salaam or Mombasa can also be declared and cleared at RRA customs offices at the port. On entry to Rwanda, checks will be undertaken to ensure the goods are the same as those declared at the port.
Dry Ports
Not all imports and exports are processed at Border Posts, some consignments are declared and processed at dry ports. This is typically because of the nature of the products, the value or the entry. There are three main types of inland border post:
- Dry ports capable of handling high-value consignments, with associated warehouses
o Masaka, Gikondo / Customs HQ, Rubavu Inland Office, Mutara
- Airports
o Kigali Airport and Rusizi Airport
- Oil Depots
o Such as Gatsata, Kabuye, Rusororo and Jabana Oil Depots
When are imports declared at Dry Ports?

There are three situations when imports must be declared at inland border posts.
Firstly, dry ports must be used when importing at a border goods above a certain value. The import value threshold varies depending upon the capacity of the border post, see the list of border posts on page 380.
The main dry port for this use is Gikondo / Customs HQ in Kigali. However, Rubavu Inland Office and Mutara can be also be used for this purpose for imports into Gisenyi and Rusizi border posts respectively.
Dry ports must also be used for processing and declaring imports when goods are imported by airplane to an airport. The goods must be declared at the airport they land at. The process is the same as at Border Posts.
Finally, imported fuel and petroleum products must be processed and declared at oil depot dry ports. The importer can choose whichever oil depot to use.
When are Dry Ports used for exports?
There is no threshold of value for declaring exports at a border. The taxpayer may choose whether to declare at a Border Post or a Dry Port.
What are One Stop Border Posts (OSBPs)?
One Stop Border Posts (OSBPs) are border posts where RRA Customs Officials work in the same building as the neighbouring country Customs Officials. This allows the

export procedures of the neighbouring country, and the import procedures of RRA (or vice versa) to be conducted in one place at one time, reducing the time taken when importing or exporting goods.
Note that borders with OSBPs still have border posts on each side of the border. However, the Clearing Agent only needs to visit the border post in the country they are importing into, as displayed in the example below.

Exporting goods from Rwanda and importing into Tanzania
Exporting goods from Tanzania and importing into Rwanda
Exporting Taxpayer	Importing Taxpayer




OSBP
Tanzania Export Rwanda Import procedures

OSBP
Tanzania Export Rwanda Import procedures


Rwanda		Tanzania Border
List of Border Posts and Dry Ports
The list of currently operational RRA Border Posts and Dry Ports is displayed below, including details of the border country, opening hours, manager contact details, import declaration value threshold (FRW) and notes such as if the Border Post is a One Stop Border Post (OSBP).
The import value threshold (FRW) refers to the value of imports that can be processed directly at that border post. It is important to note that higher value consignments are still able to pass through this border post, but must be declared and processed at a Dry Port, see page 377 for more details.






Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
11AH
Akanyaru- Haut
Burundi
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5739
500,000
OSBP in process
11BZ
Buziba
Uganda
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5763
500,000

11GA
Gatuna
Uganda
24
hours
078818 5731
2,500,000
OSBP
11GI/ HQ01
Gikondo / Customs HQ
Dry Port
07:00 -
24:00
078818 5712
077818 5713


11GT
Gatsata Oil Depots
Dry Port
07:00 -
24:00
078818 5668







Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
11KA
Kagitumba
Uganda
06:00 -
20:00
078818 5732
3,000,000
OSBP
11KB
Kabuye Oil Depots
Dry Port
24
hours
078818 5599


11RS
Rusororo Oil Depots
Dry Port
07:00 -
24:00
078818 5912


11RE
Rutete / Nemba
Burundi
04:00 -
22:00
078818 5578
2,000,000
OSBP
11RU
Rusumo
Tanzania
24
hours
078818 5735
2,500,000
OSBP





Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
11DPW
Masaka
Dry Port
7:00 -
12:00
0788198500


11SDV
Bollore Logistics RW
Dry Port
7:00 -
24:00
252575584


12KP
Kigali Poste
Dry Port
07:00 -
19:00
078818 5547


21KA
Kigali Airport (Freight)
Dry Port
07:00 -
24:00
078818 5717


22AE
Kigali Airport (Passengers)
Dry Port
24
hours
078818 5724







Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
31CY
Cyanika
Uganda
06:00 -
19:00
078818 5737
3,000,000
OSBP in process
31GC
Gisenyi Corniche
DRC
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5738
1,000,000
DRC closes earlier
32PL
Gisenyi Poids- Lourds
DRC
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5667
1,000,000
DRC closes earlier
32RB
Rubavu Inland Office
Dry Port
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5738


41BU
Bugarama
DRC
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5746
1,000,000






Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
41MT
Mutara
Dry Port
07:00 -
17:00
078818 5729


41CY
Rusizi 1
DRC
06:00 -
22:00
078818 5744
1,000,000

41MU
Rusizi 2 / Mururu
DRC
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5745
1,000,000

41KA
Rusizi Airport
Dry Port
06:00 -
16:30
078818 5829


41RZ
Raha Warehouse
Dry Port
07:00 -
17:00
078818 5829







Code
Name of Border Post or Dry Port

Border Country

Opening Hours

Contact Number
Import Value Threshold (FRW)


Notes
41RU
Ruhwa
Burundi
06:00 -
18:00
078818 5728
1,000,000
OSBP
11JB
Jabana Oil Depots
Dry Port
07:00 -
24:00
078818 5768


Declaring Imports and Exports
What is the general procedure when declaring imports or exports at Border Posts or at Dry Ports?
Step 1: Taxpayer prepares all necessary documents and contracts a Clearing Agent.
Step 2: The Clearing Agent prepares and submits an import or export declaration to RRA using the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW).
Step 3: The Clearing Agent receives assessment notices, containing the amounts of customs duties due. The taxpayer pays all customs duties due, either directly or through the Clearing Agent. The assessment notice may contain different 'Doc IDs' for different tax types. If so, these must each be paid separately.
Step 4: The ReSW system allocates the consignment to a certain Customs channel. If verification is required, Customs Officers will request the necessary documents and/or access to the consignment. If there are any problems, further action may be required.
Step 5: After successful verification, the Customs Officer provides the taxpayer with a release order.
Step 6: The taxpayer pays any due warehousing fees, if applicable, to the warehouse owner.
Step 7: The taxpayer receives an exit note and may leave with their consignment.

When consignments are continuing to Dry Ports for declaration, what is the procedure at Border Posts?
When declaring at Dry Ports except airports, see page 377, there are three steps to be fulfilled at the Border Posts whilst on the way to the Dry Ports. These are:
- The consignment is sealed to ensure the it is not opened or altered before reaching the Dry Port.
- The Customs Officer generates a Warehousing Document on the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) system. This is provided for free.
- The consignment may continue to the Dry Port and begin declaration as explained on page 387.
What is the procedure at the ports of Dar es Salaam or Mombasa when importing?
There are two options available to taxpayers when importing through the Dar Es Salaam or Mombasa ports.
Firstly, the full declaration process as explained on page 387 can be carried out at the port, including payment of Customs Duties and all necessary verifications.
Alternatively, the process for when consignments are continuing to Dry Ports for declaration as explained above can be carried out at the port, including sealing the consignment and generating a Warehousing Document. The seals and document are then checked again at the Border Post on the way to the Dry Port.

Facilitation Schemes
What are the available taxpayer facilitation schemes?
RRA recognises the importance of trade to Rwanda's development. Therefore, RRA has implemented many additional schemes to facilitate taxpayers in the import and export process. Each of these are discussed in more detail below, and include:
- For small scale traders:
o Simplified Trade Regime
- For frequent, compliant traders:
o Gold Card Scheme
o Authorised Economic Operator
o Pre-payment facility
o Quitus Fiscal
- For certain types of goods:
o Pre-clearance facility
o Immediate Release of Goods
o Duty Remission scheme
- For any taxpayers:
o Cargo Tracking System
o Mobile Cargo Scanners
Taxpayers may benefit from many of these facilitation schemes at the same time. It is important to note that the majority of these facilitation schemes require the taxpayer or their clearing agent to apply, see each of the explanations in turn below.

What is the Simplified Trade Regime?
The simplified trade regime is available to taxpayers and small scale traders importing or exporting goods valued at less than FRW 500,000 per consignment. This is automatic for consignments of this nature, no application is necessary.
It is important to note that traders using the simplified trade regime are still required to pay any due Customs Duties as normal.
However, they are not required to contract a Clearing Agent or to have a Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). Instead, the traders can provide all necessary documents to Customs officials at the border, who will submit the declarations on their behalf. Finally, these small scale traders are permitted to submit a Simplified Import Declaration and Simplified Export Declaration which require less details and cost a lower computer processing fee (FRW 500) than the regular declarations (FRW 3,000).
In addition, taxpayers and small scale traders exporting goods valued at less than USD 2,000 (two thousand US dollars) can apply for a Simplified Certificate of Origin, see page 359.
What is the Gold Card Scheme?
The Gold Card Scheme is a privileged status available to taxpayers who have a good compliance record with RRA. Members of the Gold Card Scheme gain many benefits

including priority clearance of consignments during the importing and exporting process. Taxpayers must apply for Gold Card Scheme membership, which requires:
- Good history of compliance with all RRA departments.
- Imported or exported goods with the total CIF value above FRW 200,000,000 during the year.
For more details on the benefits and application process for the Gold Card Scheme, see the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/gold_car d_scheme_applicant_information_pamphlet.pdf.
What is the Authorised Economic Operator (AEO)?
The AEO is a privileged status available to taxpayers who have a good compliance record with all applicable EAC tax administrations. The benefits available to AEOs are similar in nature and even greater than for the Gold Card Scheme, described above, and are available throughout the EAC, but have even stricter application requirements.
For more details on the benefits and application process to be certified as an AEO, see the RRA website at:
http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=354.
What is the pre-payment facility?
The pre-payment facility allows taxpayers to apply to set up accounts with RRA to pay in advance for any due Customs Duties, reducing the time taken when importing

or exporting. Taxpayers must apply for the pre-payment facility, and approval is based upon their frequency of imports and previous tax compliance.
In order to apply for the pre-payment facility, taxpayers must request the Prepayment Account Application Form. The application form is submitted to the Commissioner for Customs Services Department. Once approved, there is no limit to the amount that can be paid into the pre- payment account, and the taxpayer receives notification each time the account is used.
What is a Quitus Fiscal certificate?
A Quitus Fiscal certificate is available, upon request, to taxpayers who have demonstrated a history of correct tax compliance. The benefit of Quitus Fiscal is that certified taxpayers are not required to pay WHT 5%.
The procedure and requirements for applying for a Quitus Fiscal certificate are listed in more detail on page 49, but in terms of Customs, the taxpayer is required to have:
- Imported at least 4 times during the year.
- Imported goods with the total CIF value above FRW 20,000,000 during the year.
- A physical business address in Rwanda.

What is the pre-clearance facility?
The pre-clearance facility allows the clearing agent to begin the declaration process for certain goods before they arrive at a border post. The types of goods that are allowed pre-clearance include:
- Imported goods produced within the EAC, also referred to as Intra-Regional Trade.
- Perishable goods, such as:
o Food
o Medicine
o Live animals
- Fragile or difficult to unload goods.
- Government institution or project materials.
For Intra-Regional Trade, this facility is granted automatically and no application is required. The clearing agent can immediately begin the declaration process.
For other consignments, of goods produced outside the EAC, the clearing agent can apply for pre-clearance in the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) system. If the request for pre-clearance is approved, the clearing agent can begin the declaration process and pay any due taxes and fees as normal before reaching the border post or dry port.
What is the Immediate Release of Goods?
The Immediate Release of Goods facility, also referred to as Dédouanement À Domicile (DAD), allows the customs

procedures for certain goods to be carried out at a taxpayer's premises rather than at border posts or dry port, subject to approval. The types of goods that are allowed pre-clearance include:
- Perishable goods, such as:
o Food
o Medicine
o Live animals
- Fragile or difficult to unload goods.
- Government institution or project materials.
For consignments of this nature, the clearing agent can apply for Immediate Release in the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) system. If the request for Immediate Release is approved, the consignment can be immediately released form the border post and dry port, and then kept at a taxpayers premises until Customs Officials have completed the declaration process.
What is the Duty Remission scheme?
The Duty Remission scheme is an exemption from import duty available to taxpayers who are importing goods to be used as inputs in the production of goods for export, or in the production of particular goods for home consumption. The list of particular goods for home consumption that the Duty Remission scheme can apply to is contained within EAC gazettes, available at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=349&L=0

Taxpayers must apply for the Duty Remission scheme by writing a letter to the Commissioner for Customs Services Department (CSD), explaining the reasons for application. If approved, the Duty Remission is valid for a period of twelve (12) months.
There are conditions attached to the Duty Remission scheme. A taxpayer must:
- Pay Import Duty on any imported goods not used in the production of goods for export or particular goods for home consumption.
o Any unpaid Import Duty that is liable is subject to a penalty of 10% of the dutiable value.
- Submit quarterly returns to the Commissioner for Customs Services Department (CSD) giving relevant information as required.
o A taxpayer who does not submit a return as required is liable to a fine of USD 2,000 (two thousand US Dollars).
What is the Regional Electronic Cargo Tracking System?
The Regional Electronic Cargo Tracking System (RECTS) is a facilitation scheme aimed at increasing the security of consignments by electronically sealing and monitoring the trucks from regional ports to Rwanda. Any tampering with the seal, or unexpected deviations from the transit path, can be instantly detected and responded to by Rapid Response Units (RRUs).

The RECTS is only available for consignments using the Northern Corridor, i.e. from the port of Mombasa in Kenya to Rwanda. In addition, there is currently no fee or application process for the RECTS, but the allocation and arming of electronic seals is decided by RRA staff at the Port of Mombasa. RECTS is under development through the Southern Corridor, i.e. from the port of Dar Es Salaam in Tanzania to Rwanda.
What are Mobile Cargo Scanners?
RRA has three mobile cargo scanners, situated at Customs HQ / Gikondo Dry Port and Gatuna and Rusumo Border Posts. The mobile cargo scanners are able to carry out physical verification of medium risk consignments with reduced intrusion and time. Taxpayers can request for mobile cargo scanners to be used at these locations free of charge through their Clearing Agent.

Importing Motor Vehicles
What is the process for importing motor vehicles?
Imported motor vehicles must be declared at 'Gikondo / Customs HQ' Dry Port. See page 378 for the process at Border Posts when declaring at Dry Ports. If the motor vehicle does not have a number plate, they will receive a transit number plate until the process is completed.
Once at Gikondo / Customs HQ, the process for declaring imported motor vehicles is similar to declarations of other types of goods, see page 387. The only difference is the additional step of registration of the motor vehicle.
Registration of the motor vehicle first requires the owner to have a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). If they do not already have a TIN, they are provided with one. Secondly, the owner must provide a passport photo and either a Rwandan ID card or passport.
Finally, they are registered as owner of the motor vehicle, and provided with a Rwandan number plate and 'Yellow Card' logbook. This initial registration service and the provision of the number plate has already been paid for within the Motor Vehicle Registration Fee (MVF).
How are imported brand new motor vehicles valued?
Brand new imported motor vehicles are valued at Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) using the transaction price invoices or equivalent documents as normal.

How are imported used motor vehicles valued?
Used or second hand imported motor vehicles are valued using the depreciation method. The transaction price may also be used in special circumstances.
The first step of the depreciation method is to download the valuation database. The link to the spreadsheet is available on the RRA website at:
http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=219.
The valuation database contains details on the brand, mark, engine, drive, year and body style. Identify the exact description of the motor vehicle, and then note the 'When New Price ($)'. This price, in US Dollars, is the base of the depreciation. Contact RRA if you cannot identify the appropriate motor vehicle. An example view of the valuation database is shown below.

The depreciation method then uses a standardised depreciation rate depending upon the age of the car. The depreciation schedule is shown below:


Date of Manufacture
Depreciation
Less than 1 year ago
0%
Between 1 and 2 years ago
20%
Between 2 and 3 years ago
30%
Between 3 and 4 years ago
40%
Between 4 and 5 years ago
50%
Between 5 and 6 years ago
55%
Between 6 and 7 years ago
60%
Between 7 and 8 years ago
65%
Between 8 and 9 years ago
70%
Between 9 and 10 years ago
75%
More than 10 years ago
80%
What are the Customs Duties on imported motor vehicles?
The rates of Customs Duties on imported motor vehicles are summarised on page 401 below. In addition, a flat rate Motor Vehicle Registration Fee (MVF) is charged upon all imported motor vehicles without any exemptions. This depends upon the capacity or displacement of the engine in cubic centimetres (cc) and is displayed on page 367.

The final tab of the depreciation method spreadsheet, titled 'Depreciation Schedule' can be used to estimate the Customs Duties due for imported motor vehicles.


Customs


Vehicles
Cate- gory
Import Duty
Excise Duty
VAT
IDL
WHT 5%
AUL
Non-utility motor vehicles
Engine capacity less than 1,500cc
A
25%
5%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Engine capacity between 1,501cc and 2,500cc
B
25%
10%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Engine capacity more than 2,501cc
C
25%
15%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Utility motor vehicles
Tractors
D
0%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Minibuses (with less than 25 seats)
E
25%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Buses (with 25 seats or more)
F
10%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Pick-up truck
G
25%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Truck (carrying capacity below 20 tonnes)
H
10%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
Truck (carrying capacity 20 tonnes and above)
I
0%
0%
18%
1.5%
5%
0.2%
What are the requirements for receiving special number plates and exemption from certain Customs Duties when importing motor vehicles?
The normal number plate provided for Rwandan motor vehicles begins with 'RA'. There are also public institution number plates such as 'RDF', 'RNP' or 'GR'. These vehicles must have all customs duties due paid as normal.
On the other hand, some international institutions and foreign investors are exempt from all customs duties, except for Motor Vehicle Registration Fees (MVF). The number plates are issued by RRA, but require supporting documents from other public institutions. These include:
- 'IT' Foreign Investors
This requires a letter from Rwanda Development Board (RDB) to the Commissioner for Customs Services Department (CSD) of RRA, highlighting their foreign investor status, and a reciprocal letter of approval. This is only valid for one year, before requiring renewal.
- 'CD' Diplomatic and Consular staff
This requires a letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation (MINAFFET) to the Commissioner for CSD of RRA, highlighting their diplomatic status and a reciprocal letter of approval.
- 'UN' United Nations agencies

This requires a letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation (MINAFFET) to the Commissioner for CSD of RRA, highlighting their UN status, and a reciprocal letter of approval.
Which customs duties must be paid when transferring registration of motor vehicles with IT, CD or UN number plates to a buyer without the same status?
When transferring registration of any motor vehicles with IT, CD or UN number plates to a buyer who is not also subject to the same privileges, the buyer must pay all Customs Duties due on imported motor vehicles, see page 401, except for Motor Vehicle Registration Fees (MVF) that have already been paid for that motor vehicle.
Can Right-Hand Drive motor vehicles be imported?
Right-Hand Drive (RHD) motor vehicles, where the steering wheel is on the right-hand side of the car, are not allowed to be imported into Rwanda, except for:
- Diplomats or drivers with a medical condition. In both these cases, this requires permission from the Ministry of Infrastructure (MININFRA).
- Trucks with a carrying capacity above 20 tonnes

Customs Penalties and Fines
What law governs Customs Penalties?
Penalties for Customs offences concerning both imports and exports are listed in Articles 93 to 218 of the EAC Customs Management Act (CMA). This Tax Handbook gives some examples of the offences and penalties. The latest version of the EAC CMA is available on the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=194.
Note that penalties described as 'not exceeding' may be reduced through amicable agreement with the taxpayer.
When can goods be seized by RRA?
RRA has the right to forfeiture (seize without compensation) any of the following types of goods:
- Prohibited goods.
- Restricted	goods	dealt	with	contrary	to regulations.
- Uncustomed goods, where goods have not followed full and correct customs procedures.
- Concealed	goods,	or	goods	mislabelled	or contained in any way likely to deceive any officer.
- Smuggled goods.
- Falsely documented or declared goods.
- Goods subject to Customs control which are without authorisation moved, altered or interfered with.

What are the penalties for concealing, smuggling or mislabelling goods?
Anyone who is found concealing or smuggling any goods, or which are mislabelled or contained in anyway likely to deceive any officer is liable on conviction to:
- Pay any unpaid Customs duties.
- Imprisonment not exceeding five years.
- Fine not exceeding 50% of the dutiable value (CIF) of the goods.
- Confiscation of goods.
- Additional fines provided under VAT and Excise Duty laws may also apply.
What are the penalties for submitting false documents or declarations?
Anyone who submits any documents that are found to be false or incorrect is liable on conviction to:
- Pay any unpaid Customs duties.
- Imprisonment not exceeding three years.
- Fine not exceeding USD 10,000 (ten thousand US dollars).
- Additional fines provided under VAT and Excise Duty laws may also apply.

What are the penalties for interfering with goods subject to Customs control without authorisation?
Anyone who moves, alters, interferes with goods subject to Customs control without authorisation is liable on conviction to:
- Pay any unpaid Customs duties.
- Imprisonment not exceeding three years.
- Fine not exceeding USD 1,000 (one thousand US dollars).
What is the penalty for aiding or abetting any offences?
Anyone who aids, abets, counsels or procures the commission of an offence is liable to the same penalty prescribed for that offence.

Paying Taxes
Methods of Paying Taxes
How can taxes and fees be paid?
Taxpayers should submit tax declarations before paying taxes. Tax declarations provide the necessary information to calculate the correct amount of tax due.
The process of submitting the relevant tax declarations is different for each tax type, and is discussed in greater detail in their respective chapters of the Tax Handbook.
However, after declaring, the methods of paying taxes are the same for all types of domestic taxes, customs duties and local government taxes and fees. There are four possible methods of paying all types of taxes and fees:
- Online using Internet Banking and E-Payment.
- On mobile phones or through agents using MTN Mobile Money.
- Through Mobicash agents.
- In person at a bank.
It is important to note that it is not possible to pay taxes in cash at RRA offices.
The details needed each method of paying taxes are the same. However, there are many advantages for taxpayers to paying taxes online, on mobile phones or

through licensed agents. This Tax Handbook aims to provide the information necessary for all methods of paying taxes.
For all methods of paying taxes, it is important to save any receipts confirming the payment.
What are the advantages of paying taxes using Internet Banking, E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money or Mobicash?
The benefits of paying online, on mobile phones or through licensed agents are:
- Pay taxes anytime, anywhere.
- Avoid travel costs of visiting a bank.
- Avoid queuing times at banks.
- Avoid safety risks of carrying cash.
What details are needed when paying taxes?
There are two main details needed when paying taxes. The first detail needed is the 'RRA Reference Number' of the declaration that has been submitted. The second detail needed is the amount of tax due to be paid. Note that the amount due may also include any penalties and fines referring to that declaration.
Both these details are in the 'Acknowledgement Receipts' generated after submitting all tax declarations.

Acknowledgement Receipts
What are Acknowledgement receipts?
After submitting a declaration, for all types of taxes and fees, there is an option to download and view the acknowledgement receipt.
Acknowledgement receipts confirm the details of the taxpayer, contain details of the taxes and fees that must be paid, and provide the RRA Reference Number for the account the tax must be paid into. This RRA Reference Number is also known as the 'Doc ID', 'Doc No' or 'Assessment Number'.
The RRA Reference Number is very important to ensure that the taxes are paid into the correct RRA tax account, and that the payment is attributed to the correct taxpayer. The RRA Reference Number and total tax due is highlighted in the examples for each broad tax type below.
Domestic Taxes
In the case of domestic taxes on the E-Tax system, acknowledgement receipts can be viewed by clicking on 'View Acknowledgement Receipt' immediately after submitting the declaration, as seen below.


Alternatively, from the E-Tax homepage, hover the mouse on 'Tax Declaration' and click on 'Submitted Declarations'. Choose the year of the tax period, and optionally the tax type, then click submit. Find the relevant submitted tax declaration, click on the Document Number, and the following options appear. Again, click on 'View Acknowledgement Receipt'.

An example acknowledgement receipt for domestic tax declarations is displayed below. The associated RRA Reference Number and total tax due are highlighted.


Customs Duties
In the case of customs duties, the acknowledgement receipt is more commonly referred as the 'Assessment Notice'. This can be accessed by Clearing Agents through the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW) system. The Clearing Agent then provides the taxpayer with the assessment notice in order to pay the taxes and fees due.
Different types of customs duties can be required to be paid to different accounts. Therefore, each assessment notice may have multiple RRA Reference Numbers with different amounts of tax due. The associated RRA Reference Numbers and amounts of tax due are highlighted in different colours in the example below.





















Local Government Taxes and Fees
In the case of Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees on the LGT system, this can vary slightly for the type of tax or fee. Typically, acknowledgement receipts can be viewed by clicking 'Get Acknowledgement' immediately after submitting the declaration, as seen below.


The taxpayer can also enter their email address or phone number to receive the RRA Reference Number and tax due. An example acknowledgement receipt for LGT and fees declarations is displayed below. The associated RRA Reference Number and total tax due are highlighted.


Paying Taxes online using Internet Banking and E-Payment
Option 1: Using the banks' internet banking systems
All commercial banks in Rwanda now offer internet banking services. However, the process of using these internet banking systems varies depending on the bank. It is not possible to cover each system in this Tax Handbook, but bank staff will be able to assist with registering and using internet banking, including explaining how to pay taxes.
Option 2: Using the Domestic Taxes E-Payment system
In the case of domestic taxes, after submitting the declaration it is possible to directly access the domestic taxes E-Payment system, by clicking 'Epayment'.

This shows the following screen. Clicking on the 'Select Bank to Pay' drop-down menu lists the banks that are linked with the domestic taxes E-Payment system.
It is important to note that taxpayers may need to register for internet banking directly with their bank before paying taxes on the E-Payment system.



After the taxpayer has selected their bank from the drop- down menu and clicked 'submit', they will be directed to the online banking system of their bank. Follow the bank instructions to complete the payment. The exact steps may vary by bank.

Paying taxes on mobile phones using MTN Mobile Money
Paying taxes through mobile money is currently only available on MTN Mobile Money. This can be done individually, or through an MTN Mobile Money agent. To pay taxes individually, register on MTN Mobile Money requires an MTN SIM-card, and registering an account at any MTN Mobile Money agent. The taxpayer does not need to register with MTN to pay taxes through an agent.
It is important to note that there are small additional transaction fees payable to MTN that vary depending upon the amount of tax being paid.
Once registered, and with sufficient funds in the account to cover the amount payable, including transaction fees, follow these steps to pay taxes individually:
- Dial *182# to enter the mobile money platform.
- Choose the Language.
- Choose the 'Pay Bill' option.
- Choose the 'RRA' payment option.
- Enter the RRA Reference Number from the Acknowledgement Receipt.
- This will then show the Amount and Taxpayer Name. If these details are correct, enter '1' to proceed with payment.
- Enter Mobile Money PIN to confirm the payment.

To pay through an MTN Mobile Money agent, provide the agent with the RRA Reference Number from the Acknowledgement Receipt and sufficient funds to cover the amount payable, including transaction fees.

Paying taxes through agents with Mobicash
Paying taxes with Mobicash is currently only available through Mobicash agents. The taxpayer does not need to register with Mobicash to pay taxes through an agent.
It is important to note that there are small additional transaction fees payable to Mobicash that vary depending upon the amount of tax being paid.
To pay through a Mobicash agent, provide the agent with the RRA Reference Number from the Acknowledgement Receipt and sufficient funds to cover the amount payable, including transaction fees.

Paying taxes at a Bank
Taxes can be paid at all registered commercial banks in Rwanda. This can be done using a cash deposit slip or by bank cheque. Any payments of FRW 500,000 (five hundred thousand Rwandan francs) or more must be paid by bank cheque only.
When writing a bank cheque, make it out to 'Rwanda Revenue Authority', making sure to include the RRA Reference Number, total tax due and tax type.
On the Cash Deposit Slip, enter the following details:
- Beneficiary:
o Account Number - Write the RRA Reference Number from the Acknowledgement Receipt.
o Of - Write 'Rwanda Revenue Authority'.
- Amount - write the 'Total Tax Due'.
- Paid in by:
o Name - Write the Taxpayer Name.
o Address - Write the address of the business or the PO Box number if applicable.
- Comment: Write the tax type, eg. 'VAT'.

De-Registration
What documents are needed for de-registration?
In the cases of both de-registration of a specific tax type and full de-registration, RRA may request any documents of proof as necessary. The documents that are required may differ depending upon the nature of the request.
When can a taxpayer de-register for a specific tax type?
If a taxpayer is no longer required to declare a specific tax type, they may request for de-registration from that tax type. This can be due to a permanent or temporary change in circumstances of the taxpayer.
It is important to note that a taxpayer must continue to submit declarations until they receive confirmation that RRA has approved the de-registration. In addition, a taxpayer cannot be de-registered for a tax type if they still have arrears due for that tax type.
How can a taxpayer de-register for a specific tax type?
A taxpayer may apply for de-registration by completing the RRA De-Registration Form online in ETAX. There are separate De-Registration forms available for domestic taxes, and for LGT and fees. Each of these forms are also slightly different for individuals and for companies.
This form can be obtained the RRA website at: https://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=166



This form contains the taxpayer's contact details, business details, tax situation, reason(s) for de- registration, the tax types requiring de-registration and other related information. It should be filled, scanned and submitted back to RRA on ETAX once completed.
When can a taxpayer fully de-register?
A taxpayer, or concerned parties, may request for full de- registration if the taxpayer has:
- Permanently ceased all business activities
- Permanently departed Rwanda
- Deceased
It is important to note that declarations must continue to be submitted until they receive confirmation that RRA has approved the de-registration. In addition, the taxpayer cannot be de-registered if they still have arrears due. However, some considerations can be made by RRA in the event of a taxpayer's death.
How can a taxpayer fully de-register?
The process of fully de-registering is the same as de- registering for a specific tax type as described on page 421 above. However, the taxpayer must request on the form to be de-registered from all registered tax types.
It is important to note that there is a separate de- registration form for domestic taxes and for LGT and

fees, that must each be completed, if applicable. The information required for each form is similar.
What is the process of de-registration?
Once de-registration has been requested by a taxpayer, or concerned parties, there are four steps to de- registration:
- RRA checks the information and reasons.
- RRA checks if the taxpayer has any arrears.
- If the reasons are approved, and there are no arrears, RRA may de-register the taxpayers. At this time, RRA will provide a letter to the taxpayer confirming the de-registration and stating they no longer need to submit declarations.
- RRA may audit the taxpayer at any time, taxpayers should keep all relevant documents for a minimum of five (5) years.

Summary Pages
Registration Summary
How can businesses and individuals get a TIN?
All businesses in Rwanda must register at Rwanda Development Board (RDB). The RDB and RRA systems link to issue a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN).
However, RRA also registers and gives TINs for: Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees and non-businesses.
When must be a taxpayer register their business?
A taxpayer must register their business with RDB within seven days of the beginning of the business activity.
How much does it cost to register a business?
It is free to register a business in Rwanda.
How do you register a business?
Taxpayers must register their business on the RDB business registration system. This is an online portal that makes it easier for taxpayers to register a business. This can be done online, or with the help of staff at RDB or Business Development Fund (BDF) offices.
How do taxpayers register for specific tax types?
Taxpayers are automatically registered for some tax types when registering their business. Call the RRA call centre or visit RRA offices to register for other tax types.

Step-by-Step guide to registering as a business getting a TIN with RDB
Step 1: Register and login on the RDB system
Access the RDB business registration system at http://org.rdb.rw/busregonline and click on 'Register Here'. Submit the required details. Click the link in the validation email. Return to the RDB system to login.
Step 2: Choose the business category to be registered
The taxpayer must register as a 'Domestic' company, individual 'Enterprise' or 'Foreign' company.
Step 3: Complete the business registration application
Enter all the required business information, including attaching scanned versions of any required documents. Submit the application to register the business and receive the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) by SMS.
Step 4: Print Certificates
Login to the RDB system to print the required certificates, including the business certificate and memorandum. The taxpayer is registered and must fulfil all tax obligations.
Step 5: Register, declare and pay all required taxes
The taxpayer is automatically registered for Income Tax. Visit RRA offices to register for any additional required taxes, including visiting LGT tax centres immediately to

register for Trading License Tax and Public Cleaning Service Fees.
Domestic Taxes and E-Tax Summary
Which tax types are included in Domestic Taxes?
Domestic taxes include the following tax types:
- Income Tax, including:
o Personal Income Tax (PIT)
o Corporate Income Tax (CIT)
- Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
- Value Added Tax (VAT)
- Excise Duty
- Withholding Taxes (WHT)
- Gaming Tax
- Tax on Minerals
- Capital Gains Tax (only declared at RRA offices)
What is E-Tax?
Each of the domestic taxes can be declared using E-Tax. This is an online portal that makes it easier for taxpayers to declare domestic taxes. This can be done online or with the help of staff at RRA offices. The process of declaring using E-Tax is similar for all domestic taxes.
What is M-Declaration?
The 'Flat Tax', 'Lump Sum' and 'motor vehicle' regimes of Income Tax (PIT and CIT) can be declared on mobile phones using M-Declaration.

Domestic Taxes and E-Tax Summary
How do taxpayers register for E-Tax?
Taxpayers are automatically registered for E-Tax when their business is registered with RDB.
What if taxpayers do not know their E-Tax password?
If a taxpayer does not know their E-Tax password, reset it by calling the RRA call centre or visiting RRA offices.
What are the causes of an annexure not validating?
When completing annexures, ensure to:
- 'enable content' after opening the spreadsheet.
- use the required date format (dd/mm/yyyy) for the dates entered and the computer's settings.
- avoid blank cells for rows that have been started
- click to 'Validate' and save the annexure.
What if the particular tax type or tax period is not available for declaration?
If the tax type and tax period for the relevant declaration is not available on the 'Document Details' screen, the taxpayer can request for it by calling the RRA call centre toll-free or visiting RRA offices.
What are the causes of a declaration not submitting?
When submitting declarations: the annexures must be uploaded, equal to the declaration form, and all certified.

Step-by-Step guide to using E-Tax to declare and pay domestic taxes
Step 1: Log-in to E-Tax
Access the E-Tax website at https://etax.rra.gov.rw and login to the E-Tax system using your TIN and password.
Step 2: Download, complete and save annexures
In E-Tax, hover the mouse over 'Annexure Downloads', and click a tax type to download the relevant annexures.
Enter the required information and click 'Validate' to save each annexure tab separately in the C:/RRA folder.
Step 3: Complete the declaration form
In E-Tax, choose the applicable declaration and enter the required aggregated values for the tax period. Click to 'save' the declaration and automatically calculate the grey calculation boxes, including the tax due.
Step 4: Upload annexures, compare with the declaration form and submit the declaration
Upload the annexures from the C:/RRA folder and compare the values with the declaration form. If these are equal and correct, certify and submit the declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT) Summary
What are the two types of Income Tax?
There are two types of Income Tax. Personal Income Tax (PIT) is for sole traders, partnerships and unincorporated businesses. Corporate Income Tax (CIT) is for companies.
Who must register for Income Tax?
Taxpayers are automatically registered for the correct type of Income Tax, either PIT or CIT, when registering their business with RDB.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Income Tax?
The tax period for Income Tax is the calendar year, from 1st January until 31st December. The deadline for declaring and paying is March 31st of the following year.
What are Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP)?
In addition, taxpayers are required to declare and pay Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) equal to 1/4 of the annual tax payable by the deadlines of the following: 30th June, 30th September and 31st December.
All IQPs that are paid can then be claimed back in that tax year's annual Income Tax declarations.

Income Tax (PIT and CIT) Summary
What are the tax regimes and rates for Income Tax?
Income Tax has three 'regimes' available for taxpayers:

Annual Turnover
Tax Regime
FRW 2,000,000 - FRW 12,000,000
Flat Tax
FRW 12,000,001 - FRW 20,000,000
Lump Sum
Above FRW 20,000,001
Real Regime
Taxpayers earning motor vehicle transport income may also separately declare Motor Vehicle Income Tax.
Flat Tax

Annual Turnover
Annual Tax Due
FRW 2,000,000 - FRW 4,000,000
FRW 60,000
FRW 4,000,001 - FRW 7,000,000
FRW 120,000
FRW 7,000,001 - FRW 10,000,000
FRW 210,000
FRW 10,000,001 - FRW 12,000,000
FRW 300,000
Lump Sum

Annual Turnover
Income Tax Rate
FRW 12,000,001 - FRW 20,000,000
3% of Turnover
Real Regime

Annual taxable income (profit)
PIT Rate
CIT Rate
FRW 0 - FRW 360,000
0%
30%
FRW 360,001 - FRW 1,200,000
20%
30%
Above FRW 1,200,000
30%
30%
Income Tax (PIT and CIT) Summary
What are the rates for Motor Vehicle Income Tax?

Type of Vehicle
Tax Rate per Quarter
Motorcycle cc below 100
FRW 9,000
Motorcycle cc above 100
FRW 18,000
Car
FRW 22,050
Bus/Minibus
FRW 3,000 per seat capacity
Pick-up/Truck with maximum load capacity below 7 tonnes
FRW 15,000 per tonne of capacity, rounded to the nearest half-tonne
Pick-up/Truck with maximum load capacity between 7 - 30 tonnes
FRW 19,500 per tonne of capacity, rounded to the nearest half-tonne
Private Ambulance/ Hearse
FRW 25,000
Wheeled construction/ breakdown/ towing vehicle
FRW 76,800
Caterpillar-tracked vehicle
FRW 195,000
Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Flat Tax or Lump Sum regime or IQP using M-Declaration
Flat Tax, Lump Sum or Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) Income Tax can be declared on mobile phones using M-Declaration.
Step 1: Keep records of all income
Keep records of all income to calculate annual turnover.
Step 2: Register for M-Declaration
Using the mobile phone, dial *800#. Select a language, '2. Other Business Activities' and then '1. Registration'. Enter the TIN and Rwanda National ID number. This step is only required the first time using M-Declaration.
Step 3: M-Declaration of Income Tax
Using the mobile phone, dial *800#. Select a language, '2. Other Business Activities' and then '2. Declaration. Enter the tax period, whether the taxpayer is 'new' or 'usual' to M-Declaration and the tax period business income.
Step 4: Receive payment details and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Motor Vehicle Income Tax or IQP using M-Declaration
Motor Vehicle Income Tax must be declared on mobile phones using M-Declaration. The process is the same when declaring Motor Vehicle Income Tax Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP).
Step 1: Register Motor Vehicle for Transport Income use
Visit any RRA offices and register the motor vehicle for transport income use. This use also requires specific insurance to be purchased for the motor vehicle. This step is only required the first time using M-Declaration.
Step 2: M-Declaration of Income Tax
Using your mobile phone, dial *800#. Select a language, '1. Motor Cycles/Vehicles'. Enter the TIN, number plate of the motor vehicle, tax period and whether you are a 'new' taxpayer or a 'usual taxpayer'.
Step 3: Receive payment details and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Flat Tax regime using E-Tax
Flat Tax Income Tax can be declared online or with the help of staff at RRA offices with E-Tax.
Step 1: Keep records of all income
Keep records of all income to calculate annual turnover.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Complete form and submit
Complete the declaration form and submit the Income Tax declaration.
Step 4: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

 Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Lump Sum regime using E-Tax
Lump Sum regime PIT or CIT can be declared online or with the help of staff at RRA offices with E-Tax.
Step 1: Keep records of all income
Keep records of all income to calculate annual turnover.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete and save any applicable Lump Sum Annexures.
This step is only required if the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period.
Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the Income Tax declaration.
Only upload annexures if the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Real Regime using E-Tax
Step 1: Bookkeeping
Ensure accurate bookkeeping of all business matters.
Step 2: Certify the financial statements
Submit the financial statements to ICPAR for validation.
This step is only required if the taxpayer had annual turnover of more than FRW 400,000,000.
Step 3: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 4: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete and save the applicable Real Regime annexures, including the Balance Sheet, Profit and Loss Statement and Company Representative annexures.
Step 5: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the Income Tax declaration.
Step 6: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP) using E-Tax
Lump Sum regime PIT or CIT can be declared online or with the help of staff at RRA offices with E-Tax.
If the taxpayer has had any tax withheld and paid on their behalf during the tax period, also follow the italics steps.
Step 1: Bookkeeping
Keep records of all tax withheld and paid on their behalf.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete and save any applicable IQP Annexures.
Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete  the  declaration  form,  upload  annexures,
confirm accuracy and submit the IQP declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Summary
Who pays PAYE?
PAYE is a tax on employees' income. It is withheld, declared and paid on their behalf by their employers.
Who must register for PAYE?
Any taxpayer who pays its employees in cash, benefits- in-kind or allowances is required to register for PAYE.
What is the rate of PAYE for permanent employees?

Monthly taxable income
Marginal Tax Rate
FRW 0 to FRW 30,000
0%
FRW 30,001 to FRW 100,000
20%
Above FRW 100,000
30%
When is the deadline to declare and pay PAYE?
PAYE is declared and paid on a monthly basis. Alternatively, taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 200,000,000 may choose to declare on a quarterly basis.
Whether monthly or quarterly, the PAYE declaration must be submitted and paid by the 15th of the month following the end of the tax period.
Are PAYE and RSSB contributions declared together?
PAYE and RSSB contributions can be declared together in a 'Unified PAYE declaration', or declared separately.

RSSB Contributions Summary
Who pays RSSB contributions?
RSSB contributions are based on employees' income. These are withheld, declared and (jointly) paid on their behalf by their employers.
Who must register for RSSB Contributions?
All employers must register for the Pension Scheme, Occupational Hazards and Maternity Leave. Public institutions must also register for the Medical Scheme.
What are the rates of RSSB contributions?
Pension Scheme totals a rate of 8%, made up of:
- 3% withheld from the employee and 5% paid by the employer, including Occupational Hazards.
Maternity Leave scheme totals a rate of 0.6%, made up of:
- 0.3% withheld from the employee and 0.3% paid by the employer.
Medical Scheme totals a rate of 15%, made up of:
- 7.5% withheld from employees and 7.5% paid by the employer.
When is the deadline to declare and pay RSSB?
All RSSB contributions must be paid on a monthly basis, by the 15th of the following month, regardless of PAYE.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Unified PAYE and RSSB
Step 1: Record employee data and income
Ensure accurate records of all employees and any income, benefits or allowances paid to employees.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete, and save the Unified PAYE Annexures. This includes tabs for permanent employees, casual employees and employees with more than one employer.
Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, verify and submit the Unified PAYE and RSSB declaration.
Step 5: View the acknowledgement receipts and pay each of the PAYE and RSSB contributions
Note the RRA reference numbers and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Value Added Tax (VAT) Summary
What is VAT?
VAT is a tax on the consumption of goods and services. It is indirectly paid by the final consumer of the goods or service. However, it is paid on their behalf by taxpayers on the value added at each stage of production.
Who must register for VAT?
A taxpayer must register for VAT if their turnover is above FRW 20,000,000 for any twelve month period, or above FRW 5,000,000 for three consecutive quarters. This includes all taxable, exempt and zero-rated sales.
In addition, any taxpayer may choose to register for VAT.
What is the rate of VAT?
The normal rate of VAT is 18%. There is also a zero-rate (0%) and exemptions applicable for certain types of goods and services. VAT is charged on the value added at each stage of production.
When is the deadline to declare and pay VAT?
VAT is declared and paid on a monthly basis. Alternatively, taxpayers with annual turnover below FRW 200,000,000 may choose to declare on a quarterly basis.
Whether monthly or quarterly, the VAT declaration must be submitted and any tax paid by the 15th of the month following the end of the tax period.

Step-by-step guide to declaring and paying VAT
Step 1: Bookkeeping and issuing EIS invoices.
Ensure accurate bookkeeping including retaining all VAT invoices for inputs and using Electronic Invoicing Sytem (EIS), a type of EBMto issue EIS invoices for all sales.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete and save the applicable Annexures. This includes tabs for sales, locally purchased inputs, imported inputs, VAT reverse charge and VAT retained by public institutions.
Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the VAT declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Electronic Invoicing System (EIS) Summary
What are EISs?
EISs refer to methods of printing RRA certified invoices and sending sales data to RRA in real time. EIS invoices are required to be provided to buyers for every sales transaction by every registered taxpayer. An EBM is a type of EIS that can be used to print EIS receipts.
Who needs to have EIS/EBM?
A registered taxpayer who carries out sales transaction is required to issue EIS/EBM invoices at their sales locations.
A taxpayer must register for VAT if their turnover is above FRW 20,000,000 for any twelve month period, or above FRW 5,000,000 for the preceding quarter. In addition, any taxpayer may choose to register for VAT.
What methods are available to comply with EIS requirements?
Taxpayers who are required to issue EBM invoices can do so by adopting either:
- EBM v1
- EBM v2
- A Virtual Sales Data Controller (VSDC)

Electronic Invoicing System (EIS) Summary
How do taxpayers use EIS/EBMs?
EIS/EBMs must be used to produce EIS/EBM invoices for every sales transaction, both to other businesses and final consumers. The licensed suppliers are trained to show taxpayers how to set up, program and use their EIS/EBMs. The typical process for using EIS/EBMs is to enter the quantity, price and code of each item that is being sold. The taxpayer must then print the EIS/EBM invoice, give this to the consumer and keep a duplicate EIS/EBM invoice.
How do taxpayers load airtime onto EBM 1 sim cards?
Taxpayers must ensure that EBMs have airtime at all times. Airtime for EBM sim cards costs FRW 1,000 per month. To load airtime onto the EBM SIM card, dial:
*746*Voucher Number*SIM Card Number#
What if the EIS/EBM is not working for any reason?
If there is any period where the EIS/EBM is not working, for whatever reason, taxpayers must notify RRA and hand-write invoices for the consumer, and keep a duplicate, until the EIS/EBM is working again. Further actions depend upon the type of problem. Once the EIS/EBM is working again, enter all the hand-written invoices into the EIS/EBM.

Excise Duty Summary
What products pay Excise Duty and what is the rate?

Products
Tax Rate
Natural fruit juice
5%
Soda/ non-natural juices
39%
Industrial-packed mineral water
10%
Beer (local/other)
30%/60%
Wine (local/other)
30%/70%
Brandies, liquors and whiskey
70%
Cigarettes
36% of retail price and FRW 130 per pack of 20 cigarettes
Premium oil (excluding benzene)
FRW 183 per litre
Gas oil
FRW 150 per litre
Lubricants
37%
Vehicles with an engine capacity of less than 1500cc
5%
Vehicles with an engine capacity of between 1500cc and 2500cc
10%
Vehicles with an engine capacity of more than 2500cc
15%
Powdered milk
10%
Telephone communications
10%
Excise Duty Summary
Who must register for Excise Duty?
Any manufacturer of a product that is subject to Excise Duty is required to register for Excise Duty.
What information must registered taxpayers record?
Registered taxpayers must keep daily registers of all: taxable products manufactured, taxable products sold, raw materials used and production activities.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Excise Duty?
For the purposes of Excise Duty, each month is divided into three tax periods:
- Tax Period 1 - From 1st to 10th of each month
- Tax Period 2 - From 11th to 20th of each month
- Tax Period 3 - From 21st to the end of each month
Excise Duty must be declared and paid within five days of the end of each tax period. This means it must be declared and paid by the 15th, 25th of that month and 5th of the following month.
What are tax stamps?
A tax stamp is a sign affixed on a product subject to Excise Duty to show retailers and consumers that tax has been paid. The products requiring tax stamps are cigarettes (each pack of 20 individual cigarettes), wines and liquors (each bottle).

Step-by-step guide to declaring and paying Excise Duty
Step 1: Bookkeeping and issuing EBM invoices
Ensure accurate daily registers of: taxable products manufactured, taxable products sold, raw materials used and production activities. Affix tax stamps to required products.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices.
Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures
Download, complete, validate and save the Annexures. This includes tabs for raw materials and taxable sales.
Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the Excise Duty declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%) Summary
Who must register for Withholding Taxes?
Any taxpayer making payments of types of income that require withholding must register for withholding taxes.
Who pays Withholding Taxes?
Withholding taxes are declared and paid by the source of the transaction, on behalf of the recipient.
What is Withholding Tax of 15% (WHT 15%)?
WHT 15% must be withheld and paid on income received by non-registered businesses or registered businesses without a recent income tax declaration. It applies to the following types of income: interest income, dividend income, royalty income, service fees, performance payments, gambling proceeds and payments for goods, services and public tenders.
What is Withholding Tax of 3% (WHT 3%)?
WHT 3% must be withheld and paid by public institutions on payments to the winners of public tenders.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Withholding Taxes?
Withholding taxes are declared on a monthly basis. The declaration must be submitted and paid, for each type of income separately, by the 15th of the following month.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%) Tax
Taxpayers must declare and pay withholding taxes on each type of taxable income separately.
Step 1: Withhold tax on taxable payment transactions
Before making payments subject to withholding taxes, withhold the tax due and retain the transaction invoices.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices. Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures Download, complete and save the applicable Annexures. Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the Withholding Tax declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Gaming Taxes Summary
What are Gaming Taxes?
Gaming taxes are paid on transactions of gambling proceeds. This includes Gaming Tax and Withholding Tax of 15% on Gambling Proceeds (WOP-Gaming).
These are declared and paid by the source of the betting company, on behalf of the player. The player is able to claim the tax paid back in their Income Tax declarations.
Who must register for Gaming Taxes?
Any taxpayer making payments of gambling proceeds must register for both Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming.
Gambling proceeds are the difference between the winnings of a player and the amount of money invested by the player from the start until the end of the game.
What are the rates of Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming?
All gambling proceeds are subject to Gaming Tax of 13%. In addition to Gaming Tax, gambling proceeds of more than FRW 30,000 are also subject to WOP-Gaming of 15%.
When is the deadline to declare and pay Gaming Taxes?
Gaming Tax and WOP-Gaming are declared on a monthly basis. These declarations must each be submitted and any tax due paid by the 15th of the following month.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Gaming Taxes
Step 1: Withhold taxes on gambling proceeds payments
Before making payments of gambling proceeds, withhold the Gaming Tax and the Withholding Tax of 15% on Gambling Proceeds and retain the transaction invoices.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices. Step 3: Download, complete and save annexures Download, complete and save the applicable Annexures. Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit for each of the Gaming Tax.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Tax on Minerals Summary
Who must register for Tax on Minerals?
Any taxpayer who exports minerals must register for Tax on Minerals. Any Tax on Minerals paid can be claimed back in their annual Income Tax declarations.
What is the rate of Tax on Minerals?
The rates of Tax on Minerals are:
- 4% of the norm value for base metals.
- 6% of the norm value for precious metals of gold category.
- 6% of the gross value for precious stones of diamond category.
What is the valuation method of Tax on Minerals?
The norm value refers to the price per measuring unit of the London Metal Exchange, Metal Bulletin or other approved internationally recognised exchange market.
When must Tax on Minerals be declared and paid?
Tax on Minerals is declared on a monthly basis. These declarations must each be submitted and any tax due paid by the 15th of the following month.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Tax on Minerals
For base metals and precious metals of gold category, Tax on Minerals is declared and paid after exporting.
Step 1: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices. Step 2: Download, complete and save annexures Download, complete and save the applicable Annexures. Step 3: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexures, confirm accuracy and submit the tax declaration.
Step 4: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Capital Gains Tax Summary
What is Capital Gains Tax?
Capital Gains Tax applies to the profit from the sale or transfer of shares.
Who must register for Capital Gains Tax?
The tax on profit from the sale of shares is withheld, declared and paid by the company whose shares were sold.
What is the tax rate of Capital Gains Tax?
The tax rate of Capital Gains Tax is 5%, applied to the profit from the sale of shares, where profit equals sale price minus purchase price.
When are the Capital Gains Tax periods and deadlines?
Capital Gains tax must be declared and paid by the 15th of the month after the transaction was made.

Step-by-Step guide to declaring and paying Capital Gains Tax
Step 1: Withhold tax on taxable payment transactions
Before making payments subject to capital gains, withhold the tax due and retain the transaction invoices.
Step 2: Login to E-Tax or visit any RRA offices
Login at https://etax.rra.gov.rw or visit any RRA offices. Step 3: Download, complete and save annexure Download, complete and save the applicable Annexure. Step 4: Complete form, upload annexures and submit
Complete the declaration form, upload annexure, confirm accuracy and submit the Capital Gains declaration.
Step 5: View acknowledgement receipt and pay taxes
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees Summary
Which tax types are included in LGT and fees?
There are three types of Local Government Taxes (LGT):
- Immovable Property Tax
- Trading License Tax
- Rental Income Tax
There are also a wide range of local government fees including Market Fees, Public Cleaning Service Fees and fees for a range of services or authorisations required from Districts.
Who must register for LGT and Fees?
Any person or company who owns or leases land or property, who owns a profit oriented business of any size, receives rental income from land or property, or fulfils any of the criteria required for local government fees is required to register for LGT and fees.
What is the LGT system?
Each of the LGT listed above, and many of the local government fees, must be declared using the Local Government Taxes (LGT) system. The LGT system is an online portal designed to make it easier for taxpayers to declare LGT and fees. This can be done online, or at RRA offices.

Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees Summary
How do taxpayers register and login to the LGT system?
Taxpayers must visit any RRA offices with either a Rwandan ID or Passport to register with the LGT system.
Access the LGT system at https://localgov.rra.gov.rw and login using the TIN/Username and LGT system password.
What if taxpayers do not know their LGT system password?
If a taxpayer does not know their password, it can be reset by clicking 'Forgot Password' on the LGT system login and receiving a new password by SMS or email.
What if the taxpayer cannot find the correct LGT or fee on the LGT system?
If a taxpayer wishes to declare a particular LGT or fee, or tax period, and they cannot find it or are not registered for that LGT or fee, the taxpayer can request for it by calling the RRA Call Centre for free on 3004.
Which third parties also collect local government fees?
Ngali Holdings Ltd is mandated to support RRA in collecting all local government fees. Kigali Veterans Cooperative Society (KVCS) also collects parking fees.

Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees Summary
What is the rate for Immovable Property Tax?
Any owner of land and buildings must register for Immovable Property Tax. The immovable property is levied on an annual basis on the surface of a plot of land, and, if there is a building on a plot of land, also the market value of the building(s). The tax rate on buildings depends on the usage and tax year, ranging from 0.1% to 1% of the taxable value. The tax rate on the surface of a land ranges between FRW 0 to FRW 300 per square metre. Exemptions from Immovable Property Tax can apply to properties belonging to vulnerable groups, public entities, and foreign diplomatic missions. Exemptions from the land component can apply for land without basic infrastructure and the first 20,000m2 of land used for agriculture and livestock. The building component can be exempted for the first residential building of the owner and the commonly owned portions of condominiums.
What is the rate for Trading License Tax?
Any person or business conducting profit-oriented activities must register for Trading License Tax. Depending upon the type, turnover and location, each business branch or motor vehicle must pay between FRW

4,000 - FRW 250,000 per year for the Trading License Tax Certificate that must be displayed at each branch.
What is the rate for Rental Income Tax?
Any person receiving rental income on immovable properties must register for Rental Income Tax. 50% of income is exempt.

Annual taxable rental income
Marginal tax rate
FRW 0 - FRW 180,000
0%
FRW 180,001 - FRW 1,000,000
20%
Above FRW 1,000,001
30%
Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees Summary
What does the list of local government fees include?
- Market fees.
- Public Cleaning Service fees.
- Fees charged on parking.
- Fees charged on public parking.
- Parking fees on boats.
- Fees on small-scale quarry exploitation
- Fees on civil marriage conducted on days other than official business days.
- Fees on services and documents of immovable property.
- Fees on official certificates of a decentralized entity.
- Fees on authorisation to make or burn clay bricks, tiles, or charcoal.
- Fees on advertising.
- Fees on signpost without advertisement.
- Fees on boat number plates.
- Fees on bicycle number plates.
- Fees on communication towers.
- Fees on transport of materials from quarries and forests.

Step-by-step guide to declaring and paying Local Government Taxes (LGT) and fees
Step 1: Login to the LGT System
Access the LGT system at https://localgov.rra.gov.rw and login using the TIN/Username and LGT system password.
Step 2: Select the correct LGT or fee to declare
For LGT, click 'Declaration' and the drop-down taxes option. Then choose the tax type and tax period that is being declared and click 'Submit'. Finally, click on the document number of the applicable declaration.
For fees, click 'Fee Payment Ticket' and the service type, and select the correct fee from the drop-down menus.
Step 3: Complete declaration form and submit
Enter the required information in the declaration form. Where necessary, click 'Calculate Tax', 'Continue with Annexure' or 'Compare with Declaration' then 'Submit'.
Step 4: View payment details via the Acknowledgement Receipt, email or SMS, and pay all taxes and fees due
Note the RRA reference number and pay all tax due with E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money, Mobicash, or at a bank.

Customs Summary
Who must pay Customs Duties?
Customs duties are taxes and fees paid on imported goods. There is only a nominal processing fee for exports. Customs duties are paid by the importer or exporter of the goods, typically through a Clearing Agent.
What are Clearing Agents?
Clearing Agents are companies licensed by RRA to transact any business related to the import or export of goods. Clearing Agents act as a broker between the taxpayers and the revenue authority. Clearing Agents are required to be contracted by any taxpayer wishing to import or export goods valued at FRW 500,000 or above.
How are imported and exported goods valued?
Imports are valued as Cost, Insurance & Freight (CIF). This is equal to the cost of the goods, the cost of any insurance paid on the goods and the freight costs of transporting the goods to Rwanda. Exports are valued as Free On Board (FOB). This is equal to the cost of the goods only.
What is the Import Duty rate?
The Import Duty rate is 0% for imports from within the EAC or COMESA, or the Common External Tariff (CET) rate for imports from outside, typically 0%, 10% or 25%. The current version of the CET is available on the RRA website at: http://www.rra.gov.rw/index.php?id=243.

Customs Summary
How are Customs Duties calculated?
Import Duty = CIF * Import Duty Rate
Excise Duty = (CIF + Import Duty + HF) * Excise Rate
Note that Handling Fee (HF) is not actually paid to RRA, but is included in Excise Duty and VAT calculations, where: HF = FRW 10 per kg.
VAT = (CIF + Import Duty + Excise Duty + HF) * 18% Withholding Tax of 5% (WHT 5%) = CIF * 5% Infrastructure Development Levy (IDL) = CIF * 1.5% Strategic Reserves Levy (SRL) = FRW 32.73 per litre of fuel African Union Levy (AUL) = CIF * 0.2%
Motor Vehicle Fees (MVF) - Between FRW 75,000 and FRW 640,000 depending upon the vehicle engine capacity (cc)
Road Toll = $76 USD for simple trucks, or $152 USD for heavy commercial trucks
Fuel Levy = FRW 115 per litre of fuel
Export Duty on Raw Hides and Skins = FOB * 80%, or
$0.52 per Kg, whichever is higher.
Computer Processing Fee = FRW 3,000 per declaration Quality Inspection Fees (QIF) = (FOB) * 0.2%

Step-by-Step Guide to importing or exporting
Step 1: Taxpayer prepares all necessary documents and contracts a Clearing Agent.
Step 2: The Clearing Agent prepares and submits an import or export declaration to RRA using the Rwanda electronic Single Window (ReSW).
Step 3: The Clearing Agent receives assessment notices, containing the amounts of customs duties due. The taxpayer pays all customs duties due, either directly or through the Clearing Agent. The assessment notice may contain different 'Doc IDs' for different tax types. If so, these must each be paid separately.
Step 4: The ReSW system allocates the consignment to a certain Customs channel. If verification is required, Customs Officers will request the necessary documents and/or access to the consignment. If there are any problems, further action may be required.
Step 5: After successful verification, the Customs Officer provides the taxpayer with a release order.
Step 6: The taxpayer pays any due warehousing fees, if applicable, to the warehouse owner.
Step 7: The taxpayer receives an exit note and may leave with their consignment.

Step-by-Step Guide to Motor Vehicle Registration Transfer
Step 1: Safety check by RIED
The motor vehicle must be taken to a Revenue Investigation and Enforcement Department (RIED) office for a free document verification check.
Step 2: Visit RRA offices and pay the transfer fee
Visit any RRA offices. If the seller of the motor vehicle has no outstanding tax arrears, RRA staff will provide an assessment notice for the Registration Transfer Fee. This must be paid by either the buyer or the seller.
Step 3: Register the buyer with RRA
If the buyer on the motor vehicle does not yet have a unique Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), provide RRA staff with a valid Identity Document (ID) or Passport.
Step 4: Provide all required documents
The buyer must provide RRA staff with all the required documents.
Step 5: Updated Yellow Card is provided to the buyer
RRA staff will provide the buyer of the motor vehicle with the updated Yellow Card containing the buyer's details. The process is now finished and the buyer is now the legal owner of the motor vehicle.

Paying Taxes Summary
How can taxes and fees be paid?
After declaring, all types of taxes and fees can be paid:
- Online using Internet Banking and E-Payment.
- On mobile phones or through agents using MTN Mobile Money.
- Through Mobicash agents.
- In person at a bank.
Why are the advantages of paying taxes using Internet Banking, E-Payment, MTN Mobile Money or Mobicash?
The benefits of paying online or on mobile phones are:
- Pay taxes anytime, anywhere.
- Avoid travel costs of visiting a bank.
- Avoid queuing times at banks.
- Avoid safety risks of carrying cash.
What details are needed when paying taxes?
There are two main details needed when paying taxes. These are: the RRA Reference Number, also referred to as the 'Doc No', 'Doc ID' or 'RRA Ref No', and the total amount of tax due to be paid.
These are both found in the 'acknowledgement receipts' that are generated after submitting a tax declaration.

Paying Taxes Summary
How can taxes be paid using Internet Banking or E-Payment?
For Internet Banking, the registration and use varies for each bank. Always enter the RRA Reference Number and the amount due from the Acknowledgement Receipt.
For E-Payment of domestic taxes, after submitting a declaration, click 'E-Payment' and then select the bank to enter their Internet banking platform as above.
How can taxes be paid using MTN Mobile Money?
After registering for MTN Mobile Money, dial *182# to enter the platform. Select the language, then 'Pay Bill', and 'RRA'. Enter the RRA Reference Number from the Acknowledgement Receipt. Enter the Mobile Money PIN to pay the amount due, including transaction fees.
How can taxes be paid through MTN Mobile Money or Mobicash agents?
Provide the agent with the RRA Reference Number and the amount due from the Acknowledgement Receipt including transaction fees.
How can taxes be paid at a bank?
When paying by Bank Cheque or Cash Deposit Slip, ensure to make the payment to 'RRA' and write the RRA Reference Number, the tax type and the amount due.


Tax Types Summary

Description
Tax Type(s)
Declaration and Payment
Deadlines
Page
For all businesses...
Income Tax (PIT or CIT), including Instalment Quarterly Prepayments (IQP)
Trading License Tax Public Cleaning Service
Fees
31st March of following year 30th June, 31st September and 31st December of current year
31st March of current year 5th of following month
99

112

307
322
... with employees
Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
RSSB contributions
15th of following month
15th of following month
163
172
... with annual turnover
above FRW 20,000,000
Value Added Tax (VAT)
15th of following month
188
... which import or export
goods
Customs Duties
when importing or
exporting
352


Description
Tax Type(s)
Declaration and Payment
Deadlines
Page
... which manufacture juices, sodas, mineral waters, beers, wines, spirits, oils, lubricants, motor vehicles,
powdered milk or airtime
Excise Duty
5th, 10th and 15th of following month
231
... which make payments of interest, dividends, royalties, service or consultancy fees, for performances, or to non-
registered businesses
Withholding Taxes
15th of following month
249
... which pay out
gambling proceeds
Gaming Taxes
15th of following month
266
... which export minerals
Tax on Mining
15th of following month
278


Description
Tax Type(s)
Declaration and Payment
Deadlines
Page
For all landowners...
Immovable Property
Tax
31st December of same year
295
... renting out property
Rental Income Tax
31st January of following
year
314
For all individuals...



... who have sold
commercial immovable property or shares
Capital Gains Tax
31st March of following year
288
For anyone...



... importing a car
Importing Motor
Vehicles
when importing
397
... buying a car locally
Motor Vehicle
Registration Transfer
when buying the car
53
... requiring District's
services or authorisation
Local Government Fees
before the service or
authorisation is provided
319
Quick Reference Contents
Disclaimer	2
Foreword by the Commissioner General	3
Contents	5
Tax Types Summary	11
Introduction	14
RRA Contact Details	26
General RRA Information	30
Registration	55
Domestic Taxes and E-Tax	72
Income Tax (PIT and CIT)	99
Pay As You Earn (PAYE)	163
Value Added Tax (VAT)	188
Electronic Invoicing System (EIS)	212
Excise Duty	231
Withholding Taxes (WHT 15% and WHT 3%)	249
Gaming Taxes	266
Tax on Minerals	278
Capital Gains Tax	288
Local Government Taxes (LGT) and Fees	292
Customs	352
Paying Taxes	407
De-Registration	421
Summary Pages	424

Tax Types Summary	468
Quick Reference Contents	471





























































































































